

[page 1]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 1
REVIEW ARTICLE
Brain Extracellular Space: From an  
Overlooked Dimension to Catalyst  
of a Novel Neuroscience Paradigm
Hongbin  Han1,2,3*, Hui  Dai1,3, Leonor Serrano  Lopes4,5, Ruiqing  Ni4,6,7, 
Benjamin F.  Combes7, Yangjing  Song1,3, Hanbo  Tan1,3, Meng  Xu1,3, 
Hongfeng  Li1,3, Shuhong  Lv1,3, Zhaohe  Yang1,3, Tianzi  Gao1,3, Mengyu  Zhang8, 
Yang  Shi1,3, Jingjing  Shao2,3, Yanni  Zhang2,3, and Wanyi  Fu1,3
1Institute of Medical T echnology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China. 2Department 
of Radiology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing 100191, China. 3Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent 
Neuromodulation and Brain Disorder T reatment, Beijing 100191, China. 4Department of Nuclear Medicine, 
Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern 3010, Switzerland. 5Graduate School for Cellular 
and Biomedical Sciences, University of Bern, Bern 3012, Switzerland. 6Institute for Biomedical Engineering, 
Department of Information T echnology and Electrical Engineering, ETH Zurich, Zurich 8093, Switzerland. 
7Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich 8952, Switzerland. 8School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Shandong 250012, China.
*Address correspondence to: hanhongbin@bjmu.edu.cn
Despite huge investment, therapies for brain disorders remain largely ineffective in clinical practice. 
Accumulating evidence indicates that this low translational success is closely linked to the long-standing 
overlook of the brain extracellular space (ECS) in preclinical research, clinical practice, and regulatory 
frameworks. After over 4 decades of scientific exploration, particularly with recent breakthroughs in imaging 
and quantitative measurement methods, it is timely to integrate the ECS into the current neuroscience 
framework. This paper investigates underlying determinants of low translational success of central nervous 
system drugs and therapeutic devices, reviews the historical and technical bottlenecks that lead to the 
neglect of ECS research, and emphasizes its transformative potential in reshaping therapeutic strategies. 
We propose incorporating the ECS into neuroscience research, clinical regulatory assessment, and medical 
education, thereby establishing a comprehensive paradigm that omits no physical space for precision 
therapeutics targeting brain disorders.
Introduction
   Over the past century, neuroscience research has centered on 
neurons, glial cells, and vascular networks. These endeavors 
have yielded milestone advances that have fundamentally rede-
fined our understanding of brain function [  1 ,  2 ]. However, these 
advances have translated into only limited clinical success (Fig. 
 1 A). Pharmaceutical and device companies have invested hun-
dreds of billions of dollars in research against every major brain 
disorder, but, unfortunately, few achievements have proven 
definitely beneficial for patients suffering from the central ner-
vous system (CNS) diseases. The mystery of human memory 
and emotion is still an open question; meanwhile, Alzheimer’s 
disease (AD) or cerebral stroke continues to cause disability and 
crushes human dignity.        
   In AD, for example, more than 400 phase III clinical trials have 
been conducted, but only a handful of antiamyloid antibodies have 
received conditional regulatory approval [  3 ,  4 ]. Even the high-profile 
agent aducanumab demonstrated only modest efficacy: Its reduc-
tion of amyloid burden did not translate into clear, durable clinical 
benefit, leaving its therapeutic value a subject of scientific debate [ 3 ]. 
A similar scenario applies to psychiatric medications and neuro-
protective drugs targeting cerebral ischemic stroke (Fig.  1 B) [  5 –  7 ]. 
Recent findings regarding the brain extracellular space (ECS) reveal 
a theoretical structural flaw inherent in the existing research frame-
work for neuroscience and the treatment of brain disorders: The 
critical role of the brain ECS has long been overlooked.
   The brain ECS constitutes the core anatomical structure of 
the brain interstitial system (ISS) [  8 ]. It is defined as irregular 
and tortuous microspaces constrained by the plasma membranes 
of various cells in the brain parenchyma (Fig.  1 C). The ECS is 
primarily composed of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and 
interstitial fluid (ISF). Notably, the biochemical composition of 
the brain ECM differs substantially from that of other organs. 
It is rich in hyaluronic acid (HA) and proteoglycans yet lacks 
fibrous components such as collagen and fibronectin. This unique 
Citation: Han H, Dai H, Lopes LS, Ni R, 
Combes BF, Song Y, T an H, Xu M, Li H, 
Lv S, et al. Brain Extracellular Space: 
From an Overlooked Dimension to 
Catalyst of a Novel Neuroscience 
Paradigm. Cyborg Bionic Syst. 
2026;7:Article 0529. https://doi.
org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529
Submitted 1 December 2025  
Revised 11 January 2026  
Accepted 25 January 2026  
Published 4 March 2026
Copyright © 2026 Hongbin Han et al.  
Exclusive licensee Beijing Institute of 
T echnology Press. No claim to original 
U.S. Government Works. Distributed 
under a Creative Commons 
Attribution License (CC BY 4.0).
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 2]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 2
Fig. 1. Failure analysis of CNS disorder therapeutics and therapeutic device development (2005–2025). (A) Number of registered clinical trials for AD and PD therapeutics on 
ClinicalT rials.gov from 2005 September 1 to 2025 September 1, with an overall average success rate of ~0 to 3% per 3-year interval. (B) Root causes of clinical trial failure for 
diverse CNS disorder therapeutics and therapeutic devices. Flaws in preclinical and clinical trial design are intrinsically linked to the neglect of the ECS. MDD, major depressive 
disorder; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. (C) Volume fraction of distinct compartments in the normal brain. The ECS accounts for 6% to 25% of the total brain volume.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 3]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 3
ECM scaffold is filled with ISF that exhibit heterogeneity across 
different brain regions. Basic constituents include water, ions, 
gaseous molecules, and organic molecules such as proteins, pep-
tides, enzymes, neurotransmitters, and extracellular vesicles, 
along with glycoprotein chains anchored to the ECM [  9 ,  10 ]. The 
ECS serves not merely as a reservoir for substances; its contents 
communicate and exchange with the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
in the subarachnoid space via multiple physical and physiologi-
cal pathways, and, consequently, the ECS is regarded as a pri-
mary pathway for metabolic waste clearance in the brain [ 8 ]. 
The ECS also provides a pathway for the drugs to reach their 
target and exert effects once crossing the blood–brain barrier 
(BBB) [  11 ].
   Increasing evidence indicates that the ECS is not only a 
determinant of homeostatic regulation but also contributes to 
the onset, progression, and outcome of brain diseases [  12 –  15 ]. 
However, the ECS has remained largely absent from prevailing 
frameworks for therapeutic design and efficacy evaluation. The 
ECS occupies approximately 6% to 25% of the living brain vol-
ume (Fig.  1 C) [  16 –  19 ]. However, a bibliometric analysis of the 
Scopus database indicates that among more than 2 million 
neuroscience publications, fewer than 9,000 explicitly focus on 
the ECS, accounting for only ~0.45% of the literature. This mis-
match has created a structural blind spot and knowledge gap, 
which is insufficient to satisfy the stringent requirements of 
global regulatory agencies for comprehensive characterization 
of drug mechanisms of action and pharmacokinetic (PK) dis-
tribution profiles.
   Historically, the primary reason that neuroscientists have long 
neglected or even overlooked the ECS lies in the limitations of low-
spatial-resolution imaging techniques (Fig. 2). Similarly, the struc-
tural characterization of the ECS demands rigorous, imaging-based 
validation, much similar to how Santiago Ramón y Cajal provided 
definitive evidence for the neuron doctrine through staining meth-
ods and anatomical illustrations [  20 ]. Electron microscopy (EM) 
stands as the gold standard for visualizing nanoscale subcellular 
structures. However, early attempts to image the ECS by EM were 
unsuccessful, largely attributable to preimaging sample preparation 
protocols. Specifically, procedures such as chemical fixation, stain-
ing, and dehydration not only distort the native ultrastructure of 
brain tissue but also induce ECS collapse [  21 ]. Recent break-
throughs in artificial intelligence (AI)-assisted cryo-EM and super-
resolution optical imaging technologies now enable the visualization 
of the ECS’s true structure, just as Cajal did over a century ago in 
establishing the neuron doctrine [  17 ,  18 ].
   The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Modernization 
Act 2.0 has authorized in vitro systems and AI-enabled compu-
tational models as alternatives to replace animal testing [  22 ], 
rendering the systematic integration of the ECS into CNS thera-
peutic research both urgent and necessary. If the ECS remains 
excluded, emerging “nonanimal” models is likely to reproduce 
existing blind spots in brain spatial organization and physiology. 
In the absence of ECS-informed fundamentals, AI simulations 
and in vitro platforms will be structurally limited in faithfully 
recapitulating and predicting drug distribution and action in the 
living brain microenvironment [ 8 ,  23 ].
   Integrating the ECS into the research and evaluation frame-
works is not only a scientific necessity but also an increasingly 
explicit regulatory demand. This review dissects the historical 
and technical underpinnings behind the systematic overlook of 
the ECS from CNS research and therapeutics, explains how this 
neglect has contributed to the long-standing low translational 
efficiency of CNS therapeutics, and highlights the value of incor-
porating the ECS into future neuroscience and CNS therapeutic 
frameworks. Finally, we propose a new “cell–ECS–vasculature” 
integrated paradigm that explicitly embeds the ECS into trans-
lational research, clinical trials, regulatory evaluation, and medi-
cal education, thereby paving the way toward a structurally 
complete and quantitatively measurable foundation for preci-
sion treatment of CNS disorders, where no anatomical compart-
ment is omitted.   
Imaging and Measurement Technologies  
of the Brain ECS
   The measuring and imaging methods of the brain ECS can be clas-
sified into 2 categories: tracer-based methods with probes and 
label-free methods with endogenous contrast (Table  1  and Fig.  2 ). 
Tracer-based methods introduce probes into the ECS to acquire 
spatiotemporal changes in their signals (Fig.  3 ) [ 16 ,  24 –  26 ]. ECS 
biophysical parameters are then estimated by solving inverse prob-
lems derived from the diffusion models (see the “Measurement 
methods based on solving the inverse problem of the diffusion 
equation” and “Tracer-based optical imaging” sections and Fig.  4 ). 
Label-free methods distinguish between cells and the ECS without 
the need for any probes, for instance, by utilizing membrane stain-
ing to enhance cell–ECS contrast and derive ECS structural char-
acteristics (see the “Electron microscopy” section and Fig.  5 ) or by 
leveraging differences in water molecule diffusion between cells 
and the extracellular compartments (see the “Noninvasive imaging 
and measuring methods of the human brain” section and Fig.  6 ),                                          
Measurement methods based on solving the inverse 
problem of the diffusion equation
   ECS measurement methods based on solving the inverse prob-
lem of the diffusion equation share a common technical feature 
that they require introducing specifically distributed tracers 
into the ECS and detecting their spatiotemporal concentration 
distribution within this space [ 16 , 25 ]. Subsequently, the physi-
cal parameters of the ECS (i.e., D, α, and λ) are calculated by 
solving the inverse problem of the advection–diffusion equa-
tion [ 23 , 25 ]. Substance transport within the porous medium 
of the ECS can be described by the general advection–diffusion 
equation [  27 ]:
    
where C denotes the tracer concentration at time t and position 
(x, y, z), D represents the diffusion tensor that characterizes 
anisotropic diffusion properties in the porous medium, v is the 
velocity vector field with components in all spatial directions, k 
is the clearance rate coefficient associated with the tracer’s in vivo 
metabolism, Q is the source term introduced into the ECS, and 
 α represents the volume fraction of the ECS. Tortuosity  /u1D706    is typi-
cally introduced to characterize the hindrance posed by the 
porous medium to diffusion. The relationship between the effec-
tive diffusion coefficient  D∗    and the diffusion coefficient in a free 
solution D is defined as  D∗ = D
/u1D7062   . Constrained by limitations in 
imaging dimensions and resolution, existing ECS measurement 
and calculation techniques usually apply simplifications to the 
physical models and boundary conditions to achieve practical 
engineering solutions.  
(1)/u1D715C
/u1D715t =∇ ⋅ (D ∇C ) − v⋅ ∇C − kC + Q
/u1D6FC
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 4]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 4
Measurement of ECS diffusion with 1- or 2-dimensional 
inverse problem solution to the diffusion equation
Real-time iontophoresis–tetramethylammonium
   Real-time iontophoresis–tetramethylammonium (RTI-TMA+) 
is a classic approach, which utilizes a microelectrode to release 
TMA+ as a point source into the tissue, subsequently recording 
precise concentration changes at a preset distance [  28 ,  29 ]. 
Mathematically, this method neglects the advection term and, 
based on the assumption of medium isotropy, simplifies  Eq. (1)  
from a Cartesian coordinate system to a spherically symmetric 
radial diffusion equation for solving the inverse problem:
    
where  r    denotes the radial distance from the microelectrode 
tip. Early methodologies often simplified transport dynamics 
by neglecting  k    and calculating  /u1D6FC    directly from steady-state 
concentration ratios between brain and agar [ 16 ]. Conversely, 
subsequent methods commonly use multiparameter nonlinear 
fitting to obtain more accurate values, yielding an  /u1D6FC    value of 
approximately 0.2 for normal brain parenchyma [ 29 ]. In addi-
tion, for oriented tissues such as white matter, anisotropic mod-
els expand the effective diffusion coefficient into a tensor with 
independent tortuosity components along principal axes [  30 ].   
Integrative optical imaging
   Integrative optical imaging (IOI) uses pressure pulses to intro-
duce fluorescent tracer (e.g., dextrans), establishing an approxi-
mate instantaneous point source [ 25 ,  31 ]. Leveraging the large 
depth-of-field characteristics of epifluorescence microscopy, the 
method performs an optical integration of the 3-dimensional 
(3D) diffusion cloud along the optical axis. Mathematically, the 
projection of the 3D probe distribution onto the 2D imaging 
plane follows a Gaussian distribution. The fluorescence intensity 
 I(r)    at radial distance  r    from the source is described as follows:
    
where I(r) represents the fluorescence intensity at a radial dis-
tance r from the injection site;  E    denotes the amplitude coef-
ficient, which integrates the out-of-focus point spread function, 
the initial concentration of the probe, and the calibration factor 
of the optical system; and  t0    is the time offset for the onset of 
diffusion. By fitting the temporal evolution of  /u1D6FE    across multiple 
image frames,  D∗    can be extracted, allowing for the subsequent 
calculation of tortuosity. Combined with restricted diffusion 
theory, this method estimates the effective width of the ECS in 
normal brain tissue to be approximately 38 to 64 nm, thereby 
overcoming the underestimation inherent in traditional EM 
caused by tissue shrinkage. However, the tissue homogeneity 
assumption fails at structural boundaries [ 30 ], and the rigid 
sphere model may underestimate tortuosity in heterogeneous 
tissue regions as revealed by nanoscale tracking studies [ 32 ], 
limiting accuracy when applied to complex brain tissue such 
as complex fiber architectures or perivascular spaces (PVSs).    
Measurement of ECS diffusion using 3D inverse problem 
solutions to the diffusion equation
   To address the depth limits of optical imaging and resolve the 
anisotropic characteristics of the ECS, Han et al. [ 26 ] developed 
(2)/u1D715C
/u1D715t = D ∗ 1
r2
/u1D715
/u1D715r
/parenleft.s2
r2 /u1D715C
/u1D715r
/parenright.s2
+ Q
/u1D6FC− kC
(3)I(r) = E exp
/bracketleft.s4
−
/parenleft.s3
r
/u1D6FE
/parenright.s32 /bracketright.s4
, /u1D6FE2 = 4D ∗/parenleft.s1t+ t0
/parenright.s1
Table 1. Brain ECS measurement methods
Methodology T racer-based methods with probes EM/nanoscopy DWI
Modality RTI-TMA+ [16] IOI [25] TB-MRI [26] FS-EM/HPF-EM [17] SUSHI [209] CNT s [32] DTI-ALPS [51] NODDI/VERDICT [47 ,49] MDI [50]
 Experimental 
setting
 Ex vivo/ in vivo  Ex vivo/in vivo  In vivo  In vitro  Ex vivo  Ex vivo  In vivo  In vivo  In vivo
 Probe/stain  TMA+  Dextran  Gd-DO3A-EA-
FITC/Gd-DTPA
 Osmium tetroxidee  Atto-514  SWCNTs  Endogenous 1H  Endogenous 1H  Endogenous 1H
 Spatial scale  <200 μm  
in depth
 <400 μm  
in depth
 Whole brain  Whole brain  <200 μm  
in depth
 <200 μm  
in depth
 Whole brain  Whole brain  Whole brain
 Dimension  1D  2D  3D  2D/3D  2D  2D  3D  3D  3D
 Anisotropy/
isotropy
 Isotropic  Isotropic  Anisotropic  Anisotropic  Anisotropic  Anisotropic  Anisotropic  Anisotropic  Anisotropic
 Parameters  D, α, λ  D, α, λ  D, α, λ, t 1/2  α  α  D, α  ALPS index  ICVF, FISO  D, α, FA
Gd-DO3A-EA-FITC, gadolinium(III)[4,7-bis-carboxymethyl-10-(2-fluoresceinthioureaethyl)-1,4,7 ,10-tetraaza-cyclododec-1-yl]-acetic acid; Gd-DTPA, gadolinium(III) diethylenetriaminepentaacetate; D, diffusion co-
efficient; α, volume fraction; λ, tortuosity; t1/2, half-life; ALPS index; ICVF, intraneurite volume fraction; FISO, fraction of isotropy.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 5]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 5
the tracer-based magnetic resonance imaging (TB-MRI) (Fig.  3 ). 
Paramagnetic or photomagnetic probes were introduced into 
the brain ECS to trace and lighten the water molecules within 
the space. The spin–lattice relaxation time of hydrogen nuclei 
in water molecules was shortened, which presented as a high 
signal on MRI. The average width between neural cells is 20 to 
130 nm, and the effective distance for the probe to lighten the 
hydrogen nuclei in water molecules ranges from 2.41 to 2.50 Å. 
The enhancement on MRI decreased over time because of the 
water diffusion and clearance process of the probes. This pro-
cess was dynamically recorded on a series of magnetic reso-
nance (MR) images [ 8 , 26 ]. In terms of mathematical modeling, 
ECS diffusion measurement is realized by solving the inverse 
problem of the following 3D anisotropic diffusion equation:
     
   This method enables voxel-level quantification of whole-brain 
ECS parameters (D, α). On the basis of TB-MRI technology, the 
research team revealed the partitioned drainage characteristics of 
brain ISF for the first time, correcting the traditional view regard-
ing the high connectivity of the ECS across the entire brain [  33 ].   
Measurement of ECS diffusion using inverse problem 
solutions to the advection–diffusion equation
  Previous ECS quantification methods generally adopted a simpli-
fied approach by omitting the advection term of the advection–
diffusion equation, thereby yielding only diffusion-related 
parameters. However, the presence of convective transport in the 
ECS is a historically controversial topic [ 28 ,  34 ]. While Ray et al. 
[ 34 ] utilized simulations to address combined diffusion and 
flow, such methods are constrained by high computational costs, 
and a lack of practical applicability [ 24 ] addresses the inherent 
complexity of this inverse problem, Xie et al. [  35 ] sought to address 
the inverse problem derived from the following advection–
diffusion equation by utilizing a physics-informed neural network 
(PINN) and the 3D whole-brain ECS data acquired with the 
TB-MRI:
     
   This approach establishes a technical pathway that allows for 
the simultaneous quantification of both diffusion and advection 
parameters within the ECS (Fig.  4 ) [ 35 ]. To further enhance the 
mathematical stability and uniqueness of the solution, topological 
constraints from high-precision EM and diffusion priors from 
multicompartment decoupling imaging (MDI) could be integrated 
(4)/u1D715C
/u1D715t = D x
/u1D7152C
/u1D715x2 + D y
/u1D7152C
/u1D715y2 + D z
/u1D7152C
/u1D715z2 − kC + Q
/u1D6FC (5)/u1D715C
/u1D715t =∇ ⋅ (D ∇C ) − v⋅ ∇C
Fig. 2. Chronological schematic of 3 technical approaches for 2 categories of ECS measurement techniques. T racer-based methods are illustrated in (A), while the 2 technical 
approaches of label-free measurement methods are depicted in (B) and (C). (A) Diffusion parameters of the cerebral ECS were derived by solving the inverse problem of 
the advection–diffusion equation, encompassing primarily RTI-TMA+, IOI, SWCNT s, and TB-MRI. (B) Nanoscopy-based approaches, mainly including freeze substitution EM 
(FS-EM), high-pressure freezing EM (HPF-EM), and super-resolution shadow imaging (SUSHI). (C) Label-free methods are also termed noninvasive measurement techniques 
and primarily comprise NODDI, DTI-ALPS, and MDI.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 6]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 6
to effectively constrain the solution space. This strategy offers a 
promising pathway for resolving long-standing controversies 
regarding ECS transport mechanisms.    
EM and other nanoscopy methods
Electron microscopy
   In 2023, Huang et al. [ 17 ] established an in situ imaging system 
that utilized focused ion beam scanning EM for high-resolution 
3D EM. This approach achieved the first 3D visualization of the 
natural ECS structure in wild-type rat hippocampal CA1 tissue. 
The study quantified the ECS volume fraction to be approximately 
6.21%, significantly lower than the results derived from mathe-
matical modeling techniques [ 28 ]. Research in other brain regions 
(e.g., thalamus [Tha]) has shown that the volume fraction can 
reach up to 15% in certain areas. By incorporating contrastive 
learning and shape-aware modules, Y ang et al. [ 18 ] proposed a 
dedicated segmentation network, ECS-Net, which addressed the 
challenges of interclass feature imbalance and fine structural rec-
ognition, achieving high-precision automated segmentation and 
reconstruction of the ECS (Fig.  5 ). With AI-aided high-precision 
reconstruction of the ECS, cells, and vasculature, it is now possible 
to construct cross-scale simulation models that connect micro-
structural and macroscopic functions, allowing for quantitative 
analysis of their interactions under various physiological and 
pathological conditions [  36 –  38 ].   
Tracer-based optical imaging
   Tracer-based optical imaging methods investigate the diffusion 
properties and microstructural characteristics of the brain ECS 
using exogenous fluorescent probes. Most studies are performed 
on brain slices, allowing visualization of probe dynamic distribu-
tion within a depth range of 200 to 400 μm [  39 ]. Recent advances 
have integrated nanoparticle-based probes and super-resolution 
imaging strategies. Among these, single-walled carbon nano-
tubes (SWCNTs), with low phototoxicity, high photostability, 
and minimal immunoreactivity, are used for long-term single-
particle tracking in brain tissue [  40 ]. Analyzing the anisotropic 
Brownian trajectories of SWCNTs in the ECS has elucidated the 
nanoscale heterogeneity of the ECS [ 32 ].
B
CD
Imaging and data acquisition
Probe introduction device
Calculation and visualization
A
Prescanc alibration  system
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of tracer-based ECS measuring methods (illustrated with tracer-based MRI). (A) Probe preparation and calibration process to verify the specific 
distribution of probes in the ECS and quantify the correlation between probe concentration and signal intensity. (B) Probe administration via ECS. (C) Signal acquisition of 
dynamic probe distribution in the brain ECS. (D) Modeling, calculation, and result visualization.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 7]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 7
   Stimulated emission depletion (STED) microscopy achieves 
ultrahigh spatial resolution beyond the diffraction limit via phase 
modulation to form a “donut”-shaped spot with zero central inten-
sity, enhancing the visualization of subcellular nanostructures. It 
reveals ECS changes during cerebral ischemia and neuroinflam-
mation, as well as their impacts on drug delivery and metabolic 
waste clearance [  41 ]. By injecting fluorescent dyes into the ECS 
and combining with STED imaging, SUSHI uses negative contrast 
labeling of the ECS to quantitatively measure local ECS width, 
connectivity, and dynamic structural remodeling, while resolving 
spatial proximity between the ECS and adjacent neuronal/vascular 
structures within the same field of view [ 19 , 41 ,  42 ].
   Tracer-based optical imaging methods offer distinct advan-
tages in resolving local ECS architecture and nanoscale diffusion 
behaviors, rendering them a valuable option for investigating 
spatial heterogeneity at the micro- and subcellular levels. How-
ever, these methods are hampered by several fundamental limita-
tions: First, both the probes and excitation light must exhibit high 
biocompatibility to avoid perturbing normal tissue physiology or 
inducing phototoxicity. Second, most fluorescent probes are not 
ECS-specific, and their nonspecific cellular uptake or retrograde 
passage across the BBB can interfere with imaging results and 
quantitative analysis. In addition, inherent physical limitations, 
including limited imaging field of view, restricted tissue penetra-
tion, and challenges in cross-scale synchronization. All these 
require continuous technological advancements to overcome, 
which further confines their utility primarily to brain slices or 
localized tissue regions. As research focus shifts toward under-
standing global ECS transport functions and system-level regula-
tion in the intact living brain, there is an increasing demand for 
techniques with whole-brain in vivo imaging capabilities. In this 
context, noninvasive MRI has emerged as a key approach for 
studying the human brain ECS.    
Noninvasive imaging and measuring methods  
of the human brain
   Recent studies have demonstrated that modulating substance 
transport within the ECS represents a viable therapeutic strat-
egy for neurological disorders [  43 ,  44 ]. These findings have 
further stimulated enthusiasm for imaging the human brain 
ECS and quantitatively measuring substance transport within 
it. Single-photon emission computed tomography has been 
used to visualize amyloid-β  (Aβ) protein deposition within 
the ECS [  45 ], enabling semiquantitative parameter calculation 
via isotope labeling; however, its utility is constrained by lim-
ited spatial resolution and specificity. In contrast, MRI exhib-
its considerable advantages in ECS structural analysis owing 
to its noninvasiveness, absence of ionizing radiation, and superior 
resolution compared to nuclear imaging, establishing diffu-
sion MRI as the preferred method for ECS quantification in 
the human brain.
   Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), which characterizes 
MR signal attenuation induced by water molecule diffusion 
within tissues based on the Stejskal–Tanner equation, serves 
as the core technology for the noninvasive detection of diffu-
sion properties. Currently, several advanced DWI-based ana-
lytical models are utilized for assessing the ECS characteristics, 
including diffusion tensor imaging analysis along the PVS 
(DTI-ALPS) [  46 ], neurite orientation dispersion and density 
imaging (NODDI) [ 47 ], vascular, extracellular, and restricted 
diffusion for cytometry in tumors (VERDICT) [  48 , 49 ], and 
MDI [ 35 , 50 ].
…
…
MRIa cquired at different times
MRIp reprocessedd ata
Physics-informed neuraln etwork
Fullyc onnectedn euraln etwork
Diffusion rate-flowv elocity
Calculate 
Diffusion coefficient 
andv elocity
Fig. 4. Flowchart of ECS substance transport modeling based on PINN. Time-series images are acquired and preprocessed to extract tracer distribution. A PINN with parameters 𝜃 
takes spatial coordinates (𝑥) and time (𝑡) as inputs and is optimized to inversely solve for the diffusion coefficient (𝐷), and molecular velocity (𝑣) to calculate the Péclet number.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 8]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 8
   DTI-ALPS evaluates PVS function via direction-dependent 
water diffusion near the lateral ventricles [ 46 ]. The ALPS index 
is defined as follows:
     
   Here,  D proj
x     and  D assoc
x     denote the diffusivities along the left–
right  x    axis in the projection and association fiber regions of interest 
(ROIs), respectively;  D proj
y     is the diffusivity along the anterior–
posterior  y    axis in the projection fiber ROI; and  D assoc
z     represents 
the diffusivity along the superior–inferior  z    axis in the association 
fiber ROI. Since the PVS runs along the  x    axis, a larger ALPS value 
indicates relatively higher PVS diffusivity. This approach facilitates 
monitoring diseases such as AD [ 51 ], although fiber microstruc-
tural asymmetry may confound results [  52 ].
   NODDI characterizes the microstructure complexity of 
dendrites and axons by modeling the normalized diffusion MR 
signal as a 3-compartment mixture:
     
   Here,  S/parenleft.s1b, g/parenright.s1    is the signal measured with diffusion weighting 
 b    along gradient  g    relative to the baseline  S0   ; the estimated 
parameters  fiso    and  fic    correspond to the volume fractions of 
CSF and neurite density, respectively;  Eic     Eec   , and  Eiso    are the 
modeled signal attenuations from the intracellular, extracel-
lular, and isotropic compartments, respectively [ 47 ]. Recently, 
VERDICT adapted this framework by replacing CSF with a 
vascular compartment and assuming isotropic water diffusion 
within the ECS [ 48 , 49 ].
   Evaluating ECS-based neuromodulation requires noninva-
sive and quantitative measurements of both cellular and ECS 
diffusion dynamics. Li et al. [ 50 ] developed the MDI technique 
[ 35 ]. MDI uses diffusion-weighted MRI sequences to acquire 
image signals that encapsulate molecular diffusion information 
across multiple compartments, performs multicompartment 
modeling of diffusion signal attenuation [ Eq. (8) ], and applies 
constrained nonlinear optimization to quantitatively calculate 
and characterize the water diffusion properties of the cellular, 
extracellular, and vascular compartments as
     
   Here,  S/parenleft.s1b, g/parenright.s1    and  S0    denote the diffusion-weighted and base-
line signals;  /u1D6FCcell   ,  /u1D6FCecs   ,  /u1D6FCvas    and  Dcell   ,  Decs   ,  Decs    represent the 
voxel-wise volume fractions and diffusion tensors for the cel-
lular, ECS, and vascular compartments, respectively. The result-
ing voxel-level parameters enable quantitative mapping of the 
3 compartments across multiple spatial scales: nanometer-scale 
ECS, micrometer-scale neurons/neural cells, and millimeter-
to-micrometer-scale microvasculature (Fig.  6 ).
(6)ALPS =
Mean
/parenleft.s2
D proj
x ,D assoc
x
/parenright.s2
Mean
/parenleft.s2
D proj
y ,D assoc
z
/parenright.s2
(7)
S/parenleft.s1b, g/parenright.s1
S0
= /parenleft.s11 − fiso
/parenright.s1/bracketleft.s1ficE ic
/parenleft.s1b, g/parenright.s1+ /parenleft.s11 − fic
/parenright.s1E ec
/parenleft.s1b, g/parenright.s1/bracketright.s1+ fisoE iso(b)
(8)
S/parenleft.s1b, g/parenright.s1= S0
/bracketleft.s2
/u1D6FCcelle−bgT D cellg + /u1D6FCecse−bgT D ecsg + /u1D6FCvas e−bgT D vas g
/bracketright.s2
s.t.,/u1D6FCcell+ /u1D6FCecs + /u1D6FCvas = 1
X
Contrastive learning module (CLM) Shape-aware function module (SFM)
SUNet SUNetSampling
σ(f )
σ(f )
Lseg
Lseg
i
ECS-Net architecture
EM data acquisition and preprocessing 
Hippocampus
Internal capsule
A
B
Fig. 5. The EM-based ECS reconstruction procedure. (A) ECS EM data acquisition and preprocessing. (B) The ECS-Net architecture. The contrastive learning module maximizes 
the distance between category representations, and the shape-aware module improves the structural constraints for complex shapes.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 9]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 9
Fig. 6. Schematic illustration of MDI. (A) MRI sequence design of MDI. (B) Biophysical parameter mappings of neural cells, including volume fraction (left), diffusion rate 
(middle), and fraction of anisotropy (right). (C) Mappings of ECS with the same parameters. (D) Mappings of microvasculature (vas) with the same parameters. (E) Whole-
brain tractography of the 3 compartments.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 10]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 10
   As a tool for simultaneous 3-compartment information 
acquisition and quantification, MDI offers a novel pathway for 
elucidating brain disease mechanisms and identifying potential 
therapeutic targets. Recent advances in high-pressure freezing 
EM enable direct visualization of native ECS structures, while 
AI-assisted image processing techniques provide robust meth-
odological support for the potential modification and valida-
tion of MDI. Large-scale multicenter clinical trials using MDI 
are essential to integrate the ECS concept into the current 
framework of novel drug and medical device development [  53 ].
   Table  1  summarizes the main characteristics of ECS imaging 
and measurement methods, illustrating the evolution of this 
field from tracer-based, ex vivo approaches toward label-free, 
in vivo, and clinically applicable techniques. Key technological 
milestones over the past decade, such as AI-assisted cryo-EM 
reconstruction, super-resolution live imaging, and quantitative 
clinical MRI, have progressively overcome the core technical 
bottlenecks that previously hindered the integration of the ECS 
into neuroscience research and therapeutic development. By 
virtue of these tools, the ECS should no longer be regarded as 
a passive space but must be systematically studied as a structur-
ally and functionally critical domain. This series of technical 
advances paves the way for integrating the ECS into central 
CNS therapeutic paradigms.    
Latest Discoveries of the Brain ECS Influencing 
Brain Disease Treatment Strategies
   With the advancements in ECS measurement and imaging tech-
nologies, particularly breakthroughs in deep brain detection 
capabilities, a series of compelling scientific discoveries have 
emerged in the field of the brain ECS. Among these, 3 findings 
hold profound implications for the innovation of therapeutic 
strategies for brain disorders: the identification of the brain ECS 
parcellation system, the visualization of the native architecture of 
the ECS, and the active modulation of substance transport within 
the brain ECS. This section first introduces the parcellation of the 
brain ECS (see the “The discovery of the brain ECS parcella-
tion” section), subsequently elaborates on the interactive cross-
talk between the ECS and its adjacent structural compartments 
(see the “Substance transportation in the brain ECS” section), 
and finally discusses recently developed technical approaches 
enabling the active modulation of substance transport in the 
ECS (see the “Modulation of substance transport within the brain 
ECS” section).  
The discovery of the brain ECS parcellation
   As the fundamental framework for deciphering the structure–
function relationship in the brain, 2 classical parcellation sys-
tems have dominated the field of neuroscience: the Brodmann 
system and the vascular territory system. The Brodmann system 
is delineated on the basis of the cytoarchitectural features of the 
cerebral cortex, whereas the vascular territory system is defined 
by patterns of arterial supply and venous drainage [  54 –  56 ]. 
However, neither of these classical paradigms accounts for the 
spatial transport pathways or diffusion profiles within the ECS. 
Utilizing TB-MRI, Han et al. demonstrated that tracers injected 
into the caudate nucleus (Cn) and Tha of adult rat brains were 
strictly confined to their respective drainage territories, with no 
cross-territory communication detected. Specifically, tracers 
from the Cn drained primarily along myelinated fiber tracts 
toward the ipsilateral cortex, with a small fraction entering the 
fourth ventricle via the ependyma; in contrast, tracer diffusion 
into the thalamic ECS was completely blocked by dense myelin-
ated barriers. These findings were corroborated using optical 
imaging (Fig.  7 ), indicating that the Tha, Cn, and internal cap-
sule are not only structurally discrete but also exhibit distinct 
ISF drainage properties [ 33 ,  57 ].        
   On the basis of these observations, subsequent investiga-
tions have confirmed that this ECS barrier is not innate but 
rather develops postnatally, reaching maturity in rats at approx-
imately postnatal day 40. Prior to the full maturation of this 
ECS barrier, immature myelin results in the absence of barrier 
function, permitting unimpeded cross-regional diffusion of 
neurotransmitters (e.g., dopamine) from the Cn to the Tha 
[  58 ,  59 ]. As brain structures undergo progressive maturation, 
the densification of myelin lamellae (with thickness increasing 
from 0.14 to 0.24 μm) establishes a functional barrier that fully 
blocks this passive diffusion. This spatial segregation sustains 
Fig. 7 . ECS parcellation and substance transport routes in the brain ECS. (A) Substances 
within the ECS of the Cn are unable to translocate to the ECS of the Tha and vice 
versa, despite the anatomical adjacency of these 2 brain regions. (B) The structural 
barrier that restricts interregional translocation from the Cn to the Tha is identified as 
mature myelinated fiber tracts in the adult rat brain. IC, internal capsule. (C) Schematic 
illustration of ECS parcellation in the human basal ganglia. Arrows denote that substances 
in distinct basal ganglia nuclei are impeded from traversing the compact internal 
capsule, thereby sustaining the microenvironmental homeostasis essential for neuronal 
activity within individual nuclei. Ln, lentiform nucleus.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 11]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 11
distinct ionic and neurochemical homeostasis, thereby optimizing 
the function of the cortex–striatum–Tha circuit and enhancing 
cognitive performance (Fig.  7 ) [ 59 ].
   In contrast, aging is characterized by myelin degeneration, 
attenuated arterial pulsatility, and cerebrovascular dysregulation. 
All the above factors compromise ECS barrier integrity, reduce 
ISF drainage efficiency, and impair waste clearance capacity. 
Studies have demonstrated that aged mice (18 to 20 months old) 
exhibit significantly lower ISF clearance rates compared with 
young controls (2 to 3 months old) (Table  2 ) [  60 ,  61 ]. Ultimately, 
impaired waste clearance perturbs the neural microenvironment 
and accelerates cognitive decline; notably, this mechanism may 
underlie the heterogeneity of age-related cognitive impairment.   
Substance transportation in the brain ECS
   Building on the parcellation and barrier properties of the brain 
ECS discussed above, substance transport within the brain ECS 
is a complex process regulated by multiple factors (Table  3 ). 
Diverse physiological alterations, including the functional 
activities of adjacent neurons, glial cells, and vascular structures, 
can modulate the spatial configuration of the ECS as well as 
substance transport within it. Conversely, alterations in ECS 
properties may reciprocally influence the states of surrounding 
neurons and neural networks. 
   Neuronal excitation induces alterations in diffusion within the 
brain ECS, characterized by a prolonged tracer half-life [ 40 ,  62 ]. 
In a rat model of electrical pain stimulation under combined 
anesthesia, neuronal excitation was shown to induce a significant 
reduction in diffusion rate and ISF drainage. Using mass spec-
trometry imaging and gene knockout technology, the alterations 
in brain ECS transportation were verified to be primarily attrib-
utable to biochemical changes rather than morphological 
modifications of the ECS [ 62 ].
   Notably, inhalational and intravenous anesthetics with distinct 
anesthetic mechanisms exert differential effects on ECS substance 
transport. Compared with isoflurane, dexmedetomidine- and 
sodium-pentobarbital-induced anesthesia results in a significant 
reduction in ECS tracer half-life; this difference is associated with 
cerebral neurotransmitter levels (e.g., norepinephrine) [ 63 ]. This 
finding provides theoretical underpinnings for the application of 
dexmedetomidine combined with low-dose isoflurane in balanced 
anesthesia, thereby mitigating postoperative delirium. In addition, 
Lilius et al. [ 64 ] demonstrated that dexmedetomidine enhances 
slow-wave electroencephalogram activity and accelerates CSF–ISF 
exchange in the superficial cerebral cortex.
   Furthermore, neuronal excitation induces both increased 
electrical discharge frequency and reduced ECS volume, which 
collectively promote the extracellular accumulation of neuroac-
tive substances. This, in turn, further amplifies neuronal excit-
ability, thereby forming a positive feedback loop that exacerbates 
perturbations in the local neural microenvironment [ 28 ,  65 ,  66 ]. 
Subsequently, during the refractory period following neuronal 
excitation, enhanced ion transport facilitates the reestablish-
ment of ionic concentration gradient equilibrium across the cell 
membrane [  67 ]; meanwhile, the reuptake or enzymatic degrada-
tion of extracellular neurotransmitters promotes the resolution 
of astrocytic edema and the restoration of ECS structural integ-
rity [  68 ,  69 ]. This dynamic regulatory interplay has been further 
validated via ECS–neuron interaction simulations [ 28 ].
   Notably, studies focusing on the ECS during sleep further 
validate that neuronal excitation suppresses molecular trans-
port within the ECS. Reduced levels of neuronal excitability 
shorten the tracer half-life and accelerate substance diffusion 
in the ECS [ 63 , 70 ]. Mechanistic investigations reveal that dur-
ing sleep, slow-wave oscillations elicited by synchronous neu-
ronal action potentials generate rhythmic ionic waves in the 
cerebral ISF , expediting CSF–ISF exchange and thereby enhanc-
ing metabolic waste clearance [ 71 ]. Similarly, deep meditation 
induces slow-wave cerebral electrical activity, reduces norepi-
nephrine secretion, and recapitulates a sleep-like cerebral waste 
clearance profile [  72 ].
   As the major glial cell populations, both oligodendrocytes 
and astrocytes are intimately involved in substance transport 
within the ECS. Oligodendrocyte-derived myelin sheaths serve 
as either ISF drainage conduits or barriers, whereas astrocyte-
associated aquaporin-4 (AQP4) modulates ECS substance 
transport. Specifically, ISF drainage of Cn in the deep brain regions 
is significantly impaired in AQP4 knockout mice, suggesting that 
AQP4 regulates the flow dynamics of ISF by modulating water 
movement between the ECS and astrocytic endfeet [ 73 ].
   Beyond glial cells and neuronal activity, vascular pulsation 
represents a key determinant of CSF–ISF exchange. Studies have 
Table 2. Alterations of the brain ECS across different age stages
Region Method/probe Species Age α λ
D* × 10−4/
(mm2·s−1) Refs.
 Cortex  RTI-TMA+/ 
TMA+ 
 Wistar rats  Juvenile  0.260 ± 0.020  1.610 ± 0.025   [  210 ]
 Wistar rats  Adult  0.210 ± 0.010  1.650 ± 0.030   [  211 ]
 Wistar rats  Aged  0.180 ± 0.010  1.590 ± 0.020   [  212 ]
 Striatum  TB-MRI/
Gd–DTPA
 SD rats  Juvenile (P20)  0.180 ± 0.030  1.610 ± 0.050  3.90 ± 0.460  [ 59 ]
 SD rats  Juvenile (P40)  0.174 ± 0.040  1.710 ± 0.060  3.62 ± 0.260  [  213 ]
 SD rats  Adult  0.173 ± 0.001  1.760 ± 0.020  3.43 ± 0.950  [ 213 ]
 Hippocampus  RTI-TMA+/TMA+  Wistar rats  Juvenile (P5)  0.410 ± 0.010  1.390 ± 0.010   [  214 ]
 Wistar rats  Adult  0.214 ± 0.004  1.622 ± 0.006   [  215 ]
 Wistar rats  Aged  0.186 ± 0.004  1.599 ± 0.010   [  216 ]
SD, Sprague–Dawley.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 12]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 12
demonstrated that unilateral internal carotid artery ligation, via 
eliminating arterial pulsation, markedly reduces CSF–ISF 
exchange efficiency, whereas adrenergic agonists enhance this 
exchange efficiency by amplifying arterial pulsatility [ 74 ]. In spon-
taneously hypertensive rats, accelerated fluorescent tracer diffu-
sion in the hippocampal ECS may correlate with elevated pulse 
pressure and altered pulsatility profiles [ 75 ] dynamics induced by 
respiration also contribute to the regulation of CSF–ISF drainage 
[ 76 ]. During inspiration, negative thoracic pressure propagates 
intracranially via the jugular venous system, dilating the perive-
nous space and reducing local pressure, thereby driving CSF–ISF 
influx along the pressure gradient. Conversely, expiration gener-
ates positive intrathoracic pressure, which elevates intracranial 
venous pressure and compresses the perivenous space. This respi-
ratory “squeezing effect” actively facilitates CSF–ISF reflux into 
the venous system [ 77 ].
   With respect to the clearance pathways of ECS mole-
cules in the superficial cortex, these molecules traverse the 
leptomeningeal–glial membrane into the subarachnoid space, 
undergo thorough mixing with CSF , and subsequently enter 
the peripheral circulation via venous and lymphatic routes 
[ 78 ,  79 ]. CSF–ISF efflux occurs through 2 distinct pathways: 
approximately 70% to 80% is cleared via arachnoid granula-
tions into the dural sinuses and then into the internal jugular 
vein; the remaining fraction drains through peribridging 
venous arachnoid cuff exits into dural lymphatic vessels, ulti -
mately reaching the deep cervical lymph nodes [ 80 ].   
Modulation of substance transport within  
the brain ECS
   Substance transport within the ECS can be actively modulated 
through physical or pharmacological interventions (Table  4 ). 
Targeted and precise regulation of the ECS affords promising 
novel therapeutic strategies for the treatment of brain disorders.
    Photobiomodulation therapy (PBMT) uses nonthermal 
red light (RL; 630 to 800 nm) or near-infrared (NIR; 780 to 
1,100 nm) light to promote tissue repair and regeneration 
[  81 ]. PBMT at different wavelengths exerts differential effects: 
630-nm RL accelerates ISF-CSF circulation, restores ECS structural 
integrity, reduces Aβ aggregation, and inhibits neuronal apop-
tosis. Mechanistically, PBMT with 630-nm enhances nitric 
Table 3. Factors influencing substance transport in the normal brain ECS
Adjacent structure or 
physiological factors Species Biological mechanism Effect on ECS transport Refs.
 Neuron  Rat  The chemical changes 
following neuronal 
excitation, including 
released neurotransmit-
ter, ion exchange, etc.
 Diffusion and ISF 
drainage are down-
regulated following 
neuronal excitation 
under anesthesia.
 [ 40 , 60 ,  63 ,  64 ,  70 ,  71 ,  217 ]
 Oligodendrocyte  Rat/mouse  Acts as ECS barrier and 
transport conduit
 Local or extensive 
demyelination causes 
disturbance of transpor-
tation in the brain ECS
 [ 58 , 59 ]
 Astrocyte  Rat  Regulates the transport 
in the ECS via AQP4
 ISF drainage function is 
impaired in AQP4 gene 
knockout models
 [  73 ]
 Cerebrovascular vessel  Mouse/rat/ human  Mechanical force effect  Arterial pulsation 
facilitates CSF inflow, 
accelerating the rate of 
CSF–ISF exchange and 
substance transport  
in the ECS
 [ 43 ,  74 ,  75 ,  77  ,  95 ]
 CSF  Mouse  Substances in the 
superficial cortex ECS 
exchanges with the CSF.
 The subarachnoid space 
serves as a relay station 
for substance transport 
within the ECS
 [  78 –  80 ]
 Lymphatic circulation  Dog/mouse/rat/ 
rabbit/cat
 Downstream of the ECS 
transport to enter the 
systemic circulation
 Ligation of cervical 
lymph nodes slows ISF 
flow; dural lymphatic 
epithelium is the 
intermediate link
 [  140 ,  141 ,  218 ]
 Respiration  Human  Intrathoracic pressure 
affects intracranial 
venous pressure via  
the jugular vein
 Drive CSF into the PVS 
and back to the  
venous system
 [  76 , 77 ]
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 13]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 13
Table 4. Neuromodulation methods and their effects on the brain ECS
T ypes of modulation
Noninvasive/
invasive
Modulation technical  
parameters
Brain disease models 
and species Therapeutic target Modulation effects Refs.
 Light stimulation  Minimally invasive  1,050 nm  Intraventricular 
hemorrhage mice
 Increase the production  
of NO
 Facilitate ISF drainage [95]
 1,267 nm
 808 nm  AD mice  Enhance meningeal 
lymphatic endothelial 
cells (mLECs)’ mitochon-
drial function
 Facilitate ISF drainage  [  84 ]
 630 nm  AD mice/healthy mice  Promote Aβ disassembly  Facilitate ISF drainage, 
increase local diffusion rate, 
and decrease  
ECS tortuosity
[219, 220]
 LED (40 Hz)  AD mice  Increase arterial pulsatility 
and AQP4 polarization
 Promote the influx  
of CSF
[221]
 LED (60 Hz)  Healthy mice  Release of MMPs  Affecting the ECM 
components
 [  222 ]
 Ultrasound stimulation  Noninvasive  MRI-guided FUS  Gliomas and melano-
mas mice
 Increase the permeability 
of the BBB
 Increase ISF flow velocity [89]
 FUS combined with microbub-
ables (MBs)
 Healthy mice  Ca2+ influx induces c-Fos 
up-regulation
 Enhance ECS substance 
transport
[91]
 Synchronous pulsation  Invasive  Unilateral ligation of the internal 
carotid artery
 C57BL/6 mice  Astroglial water transport 
via the AQP4
 Decrease CSF flow  
 –  Spontaneously 
hypertensive rats (SHR) 
and normotensive 
Wistar Kyoto (WKY) rats
 Water content within ECS 
and changes in  
Na+/K+ ratios
 Increase ISF flow [75]
 EAI  Adult male SD rats  The arterial pulsation 
accelerates the exchange 
between CSF and ISF
 Increased ISF drainage and 
ECS volume fraction reduced 
ECS tortuosity and increased 
local diffusion rate
[95,43]
 Forced breathing  Healthy subjects  Inspiratory thoracic 
pressure reduction
 Enhanced brain  
ISF drainage
[223]
 Cardiac, respiratory, and 
very-low-frequency and 
low-frequency waves
 Healthy subjects  Cardiac pulsations propel 
water through aquaporin 
channels and support 
solute transport
 Facilitate CSF flow  [ 77 ]
(Continued)
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 14]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 14
oxide (NO) generation in meningeal lymphatic endothelial 
cells, thereby modulating vascular dilation and accelerating 
both brain ISF drainage and waste clearance. When com-
bined with nanotherapeutics capable of penetrating ECS pores 
(38 to 64 nm), such as 30-nm encapsulated coenzyme Q10, 
630-nm irradiation synergistically reduces formaldehyde accu-
mulation and A β deposition in amyloid precursor protein/
presenilin 1 mice, ameliorating memory deficits; PBMT with 
808-nm laser therapy restores mitochondrial metabolism in 
meningeal lymphatic endothelial cells, modulates lymphatic 
contractility, and enhances ISF clearance to mitigate AD-related 
pathology; similarly, pulsed 1,070-nm NIR irradiation (10 Hz) 
activates microglia to enhance Aβ  degradation, restores ISF 
drainage, and mitigates cognitive impairment in AD models. 
Cumulative evidence demonstrates that PBMT mitigates neuro-
degeneration associated with conditions such as stroke, traumatic 
brain injury, Parkinson’s disease (PD), and AD [  82 – 84 ].
   In addition to PBMT, electrical and magnetic stimulations 
are also effective strategies for modulating substance trans-
port in the ECS. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) alleviates 
PD-related pathology in preclinical models by reconfiguring 
the local neurotransmitter microenvironment, accelerating 
ECS molecular diffusion and drainage, and restoring neu-
rotransmitter homeostasis. Transcranial direct current stim -
ulation (tDCS) is a noninvasive technique delivering low-intensity 
currents (<2 mA) to targeted brain regions, which can enhance 
diffusion and BBB permeability, thereby regulating ECS func -
tion [ 85 ]. Mechanistically, tDCS promotes ISF drainage via 
astrocytic inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3)/Ca2+ signaling and 
modulates δ-wave activity associated with cerebral waste clearance 
[ 85 , 86 ]. Similarly, electroacupuncture enhances perivascular 
glymphatic influx, improves AQP4 polarization, and reduces 
Aβ deposition in AD models [ 87 ]. Repetitive transcranial 
magnetic stimulation (rTMS) also facilitates the clearance of 
neuropathological proteins (e.g., Aβ) from the ECS by enhanc-
ing AQP4 polarization [ 88 ].
   Transcranial ultrasound stimulation (TUS) enables safe and 
efficient targeting of specific brain regions via continuous or 
pulsed acoustic energy. Focused ultrasound (FUS) accelerates 
fluorescent tracer transport in arteriole-dominant PVS and 
enhances tracer penetration into the ECS, thereby modulating 
the BBB to improve the delivery, distribution, and uptake of 
therapeutic agents in the brain. As a precise deep brain neuro-
modulation strategy, FUS holds considerable promise for the 
treatment of AD and glioblastoma [ 89 –  92 ]. Notably, MRI-guided 
FUS achieves transient, localized BBB opening to accelerate 
transportation in the ECS and perivascular influx, without 
compromising long-term BBB integrity or inducing parenchymal 
damage [  93 ,  94 ]. Collectively, the noninvasive and low-intensity 
characteristics of TUS indicate its strong potential for rapid 
clinical translation.
   Surgical intervention is an alternative strategy for regulat-
ing ECS substance transport. Han et al. developed an epi-
dural artery implantation (EAI) technique that synchronizes 
with cerebral pulsations, thereby enhancing substance trans -
port in the downstream drainage regions of the deep brain 
ECS. Even in the absence of pharmacological neuroprotec-
tants, EAI accelerates ISF drainage in both the superficial 
cortex and deep brain regions, promotes the clearance of 
proinflammatory cytokines, alleviates inflammatory responses, 
and exerts neuroprotective effects in the context of ischemic 
stroke [ 43 , 95 ].    
T ypes of modulation
Noninvasive/
invasive
Modulation technical  
parameters
Brain disease models 
and species Therapeutic target Modulation effects Refs.
 Electrical stimulation  Invasive  tDCS  Healthy mice  Through astrocytic IP3/
Ca2+ signaling, modify the 
delta wave
 Increased solute diffusion in 
ECS
 [  85 ,  86 ]
 Electroacupuncture  AD mice  –  Increase ECS clearance  [  87 ]
 DBS  PD rats  Improve AQP4 polarity  Increased ISF drainage and 
ECS volume fraction, reduced 
ECS tortuosity, and increased 
local diffusion rate
 [  164 ]
 TMS  Noninvasive  Continuous theta burst 
stimulation
 C57BL/6J mice  Improve AQP4 polarity  Increase ECS substance 
transport
[88,224,225]
 Other rTMS  C57BL/6J mice  Activate GABA  Improve ECS waste clearance [225]
LED, light-emitting diode; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid.
     Table 4. (Continued)
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 15]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 15
Therapeutic Strategies and Paradigm 
Innovation with Brain ECS Knowledge
   Traditional therapeutic strategies for brain diseases have histori-
cally overlooked the brain ECS, which fails to fully elucidate the 
pathogenesis of brain disorders and thereafter is hard to identify 
the most optimal treatment protocols. A systematic paradigm 
shift from the traditional “cell–vasculature” framework to a “cell–
ECS–vasculature” framework will provide a structurally complete 
mechanism for the onset, progression, and outcome of brain 
diseases. Furthermore, this evolution will not only facilitate the 
identification of precise therapeutic targets and optimize neu-
romodulation techniques but also provide an efficient drug deliv-
ery route distinct from that of the traditional vascular delivery 
pathway [ 11 ]. The following sections illustrate the value of inte-
grating the ECS into mechanistic research and evaluation, focus-
ing on AD and ischemic stroke. Finally, the technical prerequisites 
for regulatory paradigm innovation are discussed.  
Incorporating pathological ECS changes into 
research framework of brain diseases
   AD is the leading cause of cognitive impairment worldwide. 
The typical pathological changes of AD are senile plaques (SPs) 
formed by Aβ protein deposits in the ECS and neurofibrillary 
tangles (NFTs) formed by hyperphosphorylated tau protein within 
the neuronal cytoplasm [  96 ]. For a long time, drug development 
for brain diseases has primarily focused on molecular-level 
intervention targets [  97 ], mainly targeting neurotransmitter 
dysregulation in affected areas and Aβ deposition in the ECS 
[  98 ]. However, the failure of such drug development has prompted 
the industry to explore novel therapeutic strategies [  99 ,  100 ]. As 
the microenvironment sustaining neuron survival and the new 
potential pathway for drug or physical treatment [ 26 ], the ECS 
provides a totally new perspective for overcoming the bottle-
necks in AD treatment [  101 ].
   Because of the deposition of Aβ in the brain ECS, the drainage 
of ISF slows or ceases, impairing the diffusion and clearance of 
substances within the ECS [ 82 ]. Concurrently, this pathological 
alteration in ECS not only slows the clearance of neurotransmit-
ters from the synaptic cleft, leading to the accumulation of neu-
rotransmitters such as acetylcholine and dopamine, but also 
exacerbates clearance impairments of toxic factors such as endog-
enous fractional anisotropy (FA) [  102 ]. Endogenous FA is a key 
factor inducing Aβ aggregation to form SP and the formation of 
NFTs with tau protein [  103 ]. The aforementioned pathological 
processes, including alterations in the brain ECS structure, neu-
rotransmitter dysregulation, and accumulation of endogenous 
toxins, lead to impaired local synaptic transmission and neuronal 
cell death, ultimately causing cognitive and memory impairment 
in patients with AD. Incorporating the ECS theoretical frame-
work into AD research provides a compelling explanation for the 
current therapeutic bottlenecks encountered in AD treatment. 
In the early stages of AD, when the ECS has not yet been com-
pletely blocked by Aβ, 5 clinical drugs for mild to moderate AD 
may still partially exert therapeutic effects, including 4 acetylcho-
linesterase inhibitors (donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine, and 
tacrine) and one N -methyl-d -aspartate receptor antagonist 
[ 11 , 32 , 70 ,  104 ,  105 ]. However, in the late stages of AD, the block-
age of the ECS by SP prevents these small-molecule polar che-
motherapeutic agents from reaching the critical target areas of 
neuronal damage, thereby failing to exert neuroprotective effects 
or improve cognitive function. Therefore, for patients with AD 
at different stages of dementia, clinical treatment must consider 
the regional heterogeneity of ECS blockade/structural alterations 
and the impact of impaired ISF drainage on drug delivery. This 
represents a primary concern for novel drug development and 
clinical drug utilization. Therefore, future development of novel 
nanomedicines for AD should consider the entire process of drug 
entry through the BBB into ECS and delivery to therapeutic target 
sites, enabling targeted and specific drug design. For instance, 
ultrasound technology can be used to open the BBB and enhance 
drug penetration. Utilizing liposomal carriers to encapsulate and 
improve the BBB permeability of polar small-molecule drugs 
[  106 ], along with further optimizing carrier surface charge, poly-
ethylene glycol coating, and particle size, will facilitate drug deliv-
ery to the target site. In addition, as shown in Fig.  8  [ 12 ,  107 ], the 
combined application of photobiomodulation and specific nano-
phototherapy combined with nanomedicines effectively disrupts 
Aβ plaques obstructing ECS, restores substance transport within 
the ECS and ISF flow, reduces endogenous FA accumulation, and 
restores cognitive function in AD rats. Of course, because of the 
discovery of the new ECS parcellation system [ 33 , 57 ], drug design 
strategies for AD and other common brain disorders must be 
recalculated on the basis of the translocation kinetics of drug 
molecules within the target ECS region to optimize the tradi-
tional PK [ 12 ].           
Incorporating substance transport and PKs of the 
ECS into the research for brain disease therapy
   On the basis of the guidelines issued by the National Medical 
Products Administration and the International Council for 
Harmonization of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals 
for Human Use, the administration frequency and dosage of 
systemic medications are determined according to the monitor-
ing results of plasma drug concentrations [  108 ,  109 ]. However, 
this strategy cannot ensure that drugs reach the target neurons 
to exert their therapeutic effects. A primary reason for this 
historical theoretical gap is the lack of clinically applicable 
imaging analysis technologies for the human brain ECS, cou-
pled with insufficient fundamental knowledge regarding the 
ECS. In the “The discovery of the brain ECS parcellation” sec-
tion, we introduced the ECS parcellation system and clarified 
that small-molecule, water-soluble polar drugs present distinct 
PK profiles across different ECS compartments. Here, we fur-
ther explore the importance and necessity of integrating ECS-
related substance transport and PK into the research for brain 
disease therapy and analyze the technical support required for 
such systematic reform.
   To illustrate this point, we take neuroprotective drugs for 
ischemic stroke as an example. In 2011, according to the Stroke 
Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable recommendations, a 
systematic analysis was conducted on the clinical development 
failures of neuroprotective drugs, identifying 7 critical design 
flaws responsible for these failures. Among the agents under 
clinical investigation at that time, citicoline was recognized as 
one of the most promising drug candidates [  6 ]. Regrettably, 
citicoline was officially declared clinically ineffective in its phase 
III trial in 2012 [  110 ]. Notably, neither the global roundtable 
summary nor subsequent analyses incorporated the critical role 
of the ECS into their assessments. A modest advancement has 
since been made: Prior to the clinical translation of brain-targeting 
therapeutics, regulatory authorities now recommend that 
researchers adopt drug concentrations in CSF , local ISF , or 
whole-brain homogenates as surrogate indicators to reflect the 
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 16]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 16
efficiency of brain drug delivery [  111 ]. In reality, drug distribu-
tion within the brain ECS exhibits marked heterogeneity. On 
the basis of the arterial territory of the middle cerebral artery, 
infarct lesions in the middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) 
model are predominantly localized in the Cn and its adjacent 
cortical regions. When citicoline is administered into the Tha 
region adjacent to the Cn, the drug fails to cross the ECS barrier 
to reach the ischemia-affected neurons and exert neuroprotective 
effects, even when the dosage and administration frequency 
are escalated to levels that induce neuroexcitotoxicity. In con-
trast, targeted delivery of neuroprotective agents to the upstream 
regions of ECS substance transport within ischemic areas, 
combined with dosing regimen optimization based on PK 
parameters (e.g., half-life and maximum distribution volume), 
yields a highly potent neuroprotective effect (Fig.  7 ). Specifically, 
in a rat model of prestroke, drug administration via ECS at a 
CSF
Blood
BBB
Neuron
ISF
ISF
Drug
Blood
BBB
Neuron
ISF
ISF
Apoptosis
Death
Drug
Death
Apoptosis
Living Living
SP
CSF
FA
SP
ECS
SP
SP
SP
AB
CD
SP
ECS diff. origin
Thalamus
Hippocampus
Caudate nucleus
CSF system
Lateral ventricle
Third ventricle
Fourth ventricle
ECS in 
cortex
Cortex Subarachnoid 
space
Plasma
QISF–CSF QCSF–ISF
Q
BCSFB
QCSF–CB
ISF
A hypothesis
AchGlu hypothesis
Ach hypothesis
ROS hypothesis
Tau hypothesis
Ah ypothesis
A
O
–ECS hypothesis
FA
FA
Virus hypothesis
Aβ/ADH5
FA hypothesis
CSF
Blood
ISF*
Microglia
Fig. 8. Aβ deposition and SP formation in patients with AD elicit ECS obstruction, compromise ISF clearance efficiency, and preclude targeted drug delivery to vulnerable neurons. 
(A and B) Comparative schematic of drug transport dynamics within the healthy versus pathologically remodeled cerebral ECS microenvironment in AD. (C) Pathological 
occlusion of the cerebral ECS culminates in the failure of therapeutic agents to reach their intended cellular targets. NMDA-R, N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor; Ach, acetylcholine; 
ChAT , choline acetyltransferase; ADH5, alcohol dehydrogenase 5; ATP , adenosine triphosphate; ADP , adenosine diphosphate. (D) Schematic illustration of substance trafficking 
routes from the cerebral ECS compartment to the systemic circulation.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 17]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 17
selected upstream site of Cn along the middle cerebral artery 
drainage territory achieved a 6-fold enhancement in neuropro-
tective coverage, using only 1/800 of the dosage required for 
intraperitoneal administration [ 11 ].
   Technically, integrating the ECS into existing regulatory frame-
works for evaluating the clinical efficacy of encephalopathy drugs 
demands technologies that enable accurate quantification of intra-
cerebral drug distribution and provide PK/pharmacodynamic 
(PK/PD) data in target regions. Furthermore, imaging techniques 
that allow synchronous acquisition of structural and functional 
information on neurons, glial cells, microvessels, and the ECS in 
both animal and human brains will become indispensable. 
Currently, TB-MRI can provide PK parameters of small-molecule 
polar drugs in distinct ECS compartments [ 26 ]. Combined with 
AI technology, TB-MRI can also provide both the calculated results 
of diffusion rate and bulk flow velocity [ 35 ]. Moreover, by integrat-
ing the whole-body imaging capabilities of conventional MRI 
and radionuclide imaging, TB-MRI is technically well suited 
for conducting integrated PK/PD studies. Meanwhile, MDI offers 
an approach for synchronous visualization of neuroprotective 
drug effects on cells, blood vessels, and the ECS during clinical 
evaluations [ 50 ]. This synchronous acquisition technology also 
yields noninvasive biomarkers for assessing drug effects on 
different compartmental structures and intercompartmental 
interactions, serving as a practical tool for exploring disease 
mechanisms and the pathways underlying drug action.   
ECS-targeted therapeutic strategies  
for brain diseases
   On the basis of the aforementioned research findings, future drug 
design and treatment strategies should consider brain ECS as a 
critical factor in neurological diseases. We have summarized the 
pathological changes related to ECS in various brain disorders. 
A challenge in understanding ECS pathophysiology lies in dis-
tinguishing whether changes in ECS structure and function are 
primary drivers of brain disease. This distinction holds critical 
guidance for formulating treatment strategies. Increasing evi-
dence suggests a dynamic bidirectional regulatory relationship: 
In the early stages of disease, mild ECS dysfunction may initiate 
pathological cascades (for instance, impaired toxic metabolite 
clearance precedes protein aggregation); whereas, in later stages, 
disease-specific pathological mechanisms actively remodel ECS 
structures, establishing self-perpetuating pathological cycles. This 
conceptual framework provides essential theoretical background 
for interpreting the specific ECS changes associated with different 
diseases, as well as direction for developing stage-specific thera-
peutic interventions. So far, no preclinical or clinical study has 
systematically integrated the ECS into its research framework. 
Given that the ECS undergoes pathological changes during dis-
ease progression and serves as a core pathway for drug delivery 
and neuromodulation, this research field is particularly demanded. 
Various ECS-targeted intervention strategies have demonstrated 
remarkable efficacy in preclinical models, offering broad prospects 
for future treatments of CNS diseases.  
Alzheimer’s disease
   The typical pathological changes and neural damage mechanisms 
of AD include protein homeostasis imbalance, dysregulated 
immune responses, and abnormal neural circuitry, among which 
the abnormal metabolism of Aβ represents a key initiating event. 
Soluble Aβ oligomers within the ECS trigger early neurotoxicity 
and cognitive deficits by disrupting the transport of synaptic 
receptors ( N-methyl-d-aspartate and AMPA receptors) and 
impairing long-term potentiation [  112 ,  113 ]. Dysregulation of the 
biophysical microenvironment of the ECS constitutes a key 
factor driving AD progression, characterized by alterations in ECS 
spatial conformation and fluid dynamics related to ISF drainage, 
as elaborated in the “Incorporating pathological ECS changes into 
research framework of brain diseases” section [ 28 ,  114 ]. These 
pathological changes compromise the substance transport function 
of the ECS, reduce the brain’s network integration capacity, and 
disrupt memory formation. Given the aforementioned ECS-related 
pathological alterations, the research advances in ECS-targeted 
therapeutic strategies for AD are elaborated in the subsequent 
section.
   PBMT uses visible/NIR nonionizing radiation to induce 
photochemical reactions and physiological changes in target 
tissues. RL (630, 632.8, and 635 nm) and NIR (808, 1,070 nm, 
4 J/cm2, 10 Hz) reduce Aβ deposition [ 81 ,  115 ,  116 ], up-regulate 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) [  117 ], and improve 
cognitive function in dementia mice [ 81 , 115 ]. In vitro, 810 nm 
NIR alters microtubulin secondary structure (decreased α helix 
and increased β sheet) [  118 ]. Notably, 630-nm RL penetrates the 
skull, activates formaldehyde-degrading enzymes to enhance FA 
clearance, thereby reducing Aβ deposition, promoting ISF drain-
age, remodeling ECS structure, and improving cognition in AD 
models [ 116 ,  119 ].
   FUS combined with microbubbles regulates ECS via sonopora-
tion. At low sound pressure, microbubbles induce steady cavita-
tion, reversibly opening the BBB through vascular wall shear 
forces to facilitate antibody drug delivery [ 91 ,  120 ]. FUS increases 
ECS volume fraction, reduces tortuosity, and decreases solute dif-
fusion resistance [  121 ]. It also reduces amyloid positron emission 
tomography signals, indicating Aβ clearance potential [  122 ].
   TMS modulates neural networks via electromagnetic induc-
tion. High-frequency stimulation (> 5 Hz) up-regulates the 
BDNF–Tropomyosin-related kinase B (BDNF-TrkB) pathway 
to promote synaptic regeneration [  123 ]. By regulating default 
mode network functional connectivity, it reverses Aβ-induced 
network collapse [  124 –  126 ]. In addition, 40-Hz gamma tran-
scranial ac stimulation activates microglia, induces vasodilation 
and slow-wave oscillations, and enhances Aβ clearance [  127 ].
   Mesenchymal stem cells, neural stem cells, and induced plu-
ripotent stem cells remodel the ECS microenvironment via para-
crine effects and immune regulation. Transplanted stem cells 
secrete anti-inflammatory factors (transforming growth factor-β 
and interleukin-10 [IL-10]) and neurotrophic factors (BDNF and 
vascular endothelial growth factor [VEGF]) to promote neuro-
genesis and synaptic remodeling. Stem-cell-delivered microRNAs 
(e.g., miR-146a) reduce Aβ production/aggregation by modulating 
inflammation [  128 –  130 ]. Notably, dense ECM in the pathological 
microenvironment increases ECS tortuosity, forming a physical 
barrier that restricts transplanted cell migration, homing, distribu-
tion, and survival [  131 ,  132 ].
   Deep cervical lymphovenous anastomosis (LV A) intervenes 
in the glymphatic system via microsurgical anastomosis of high-
resistance deep cervical lymphatics to the low-pressure cervical 
venous system. This enhances CSF–ISF exchange and drainage, 
accelerating clearance of neurotoxic metabolites (Aβ and phos-
phorylated tau) [  133 –  135 ]. Clinical studies confirm its safety 
and feasibility, with short-term improvements in mini-mental 
state examination scores and reduced CSF AD biomarkers; how-
ever, its effect on complex cognition (e.g., Montreal cognitive 
assessment scores) remains unclear [  136 ,  137 ]. High-quality 
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 18]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 18
randomized controlled trial evidence supporting LV A for AD 
is currently lacking [  138 ,  139 ]. Exogenous VEGF-C improves 
meningeal lymphatic function, enhances Aβ  clearance, and 
ameliorates cognition in AD models [ 140 , 141 ].
   Collectively, physical, surgical, and cell-based strategies 
targeting the ECS hold substantial potential for AD therapy 
by improving substance transport and remodeling the brain 
microenvironment.   
Ischemic stroke
   Neuronal damage following ischemic attack progresses cascad-
ingly because of reduced or obstructed cerebral perfusion, 
triggering energy failure, ionic imbalance in the ischemic core, 
glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity in the penumbra, and reactive 
oxygen species (ROS)-induced oxidative stress, inflammation, 
and BBB disruption during reperfusion, ultimately leading to 
neuronal apoptosis or pyroptosis [  142 ,  143 ]. Current therapies 
(intravenous thrombolysis, endovascular thrombectomy, neu-
roprotective agents, and stem cell therapy) primarily focus on 
damaged neurons or neurovascular units but overlook ECS 
pathology [  144 ,  145 ]. Consequently, traditional therapeutic 
strategies not only need to overcome the challenge of drug entry 
into the brain through the BBB via systemic administration but 
also address the difficulty of drugs reaching damaged neurons 
within the ECS after crossing the BBB. The ECS provides a 
novel perspective and potential solutions to these challenges.
   To enhance the drug delivery to the brain to treat ischemic 
stroke, Bobo et al. [  146 ] proposed the convection-enhanced 
delivery (CED) technique for direct intraparenchymal admin-
istration in the 1990s. This technique assumes that the brain is 
a solid tissue and drives substance transport in the brain paren-
chyma through pressure, thereby bypassing the hindrance of 
the BBB [ 146 ]. Pressure-induced backflow is the major techni-
cal obstacle of CED [  147 ]. To address this, Han’s research team 
applied machine-learning-aided TB-MRI and confirmed that 
ECS drug molecule transport is primarily diffusion-dominated 
[ 35 ]. They also proposed a concentration-driven drug delivery 
method of simple-diffusion delivery (SDD), which bypasses 
the BBB to achieve efficient, low-toxicity neuroprotection, pro-
viding a novel therapeutic paradigm via ECS for ischemic stroke, 
brain tumors, and other brain diseases [ 11 ].
   Before the ECS was incorporated into the mechanistic research 
of encephalopathy treatment, the therapeutic mechanism of 
encephaloduroarteriosynangiosis (EDAS) for moyamoya ischemic 
disease remained unclear, which seriously hindered the promotion 
and application of this surgery in the treatment of ischemic stroke. 
Previous mechanistic studies on EDAS have primarily focused on 
blood vessels, failing to adequately explain the early clinical 
improvement of stroke symptoms. Recently, Lian et al. [ 43 ] applied 
a modified EAI (m-EAI) and confirmed in a rat MCAO reperfu-
sion model that the mechanism of this surgical treatment for 
cerebral ischemic injury lies in accelerating substance transport 
within the brain tissue ECS. By promoting the clearance of 
neurotoxic factors such as inflammatory factors in the penumbra, 
favorable neuroprotective effects can be achieved: Arterial 
pulsation synchronously enhances ECS transport and facilitates 
clearance of toxic factors from the penumbra, significantly 
reducing infarct volume (from 23.71% to 7.69%) and alleviating 
cerebral edema (brain water content: 79.68% in the m-EAI group 
versus 83.52% in the transient MCAO group) [ 43 ,  148 ].
   Similarly, application of 755-nm NIR light to the MCAO 
drainage region achieves a more pronounced acceleration of 
ECS molecular diffusion and ISF drainage compared with 
m-EAI. This intervention promotes the clearance of inflam-
matory factors and pathological proteins, mitigates cerebral 
ischemia–reperfusion injury, improves poststroke cognitive 
impairment, and reduces infarct volume by 45.3% on day 28 
posttreatment [ 44 ].   
Parkinson’s disease
   PD is characterized by progressive degeneration of dopaminergic 
neurons in the nigrostriatal pathway, driven by mitochondrial 
dysfunction, α-synuclein ( α-syn) aberrant aggregation, and 
amplified oxidative stress [  149 ,  150 ]. These pathological changes 
disrupt the distribution of dopamine, glutamate, and other neu-
roactive substances in the striato–cortical–thalamic circuit, lead-
ing to cardinal motor symptoms such as bradykinesia and tremor 
[  151 ]. Current therapies include dopaminergic pharmacotherapy 
[  152 ], neuroprotective agents [ 150 ], gene therapy [  153 ], cell 
transplantation [  154 ], noninvasive neuromodulation [  155 ,  156 ], 
and surgical interventions (lesioning and DBS) [  157 ] but with 
obvious limitations: Dopaminergic medications lose efficacy and 
induce motor complications; noninvasive approaches lack spatial 
resolution and penetration depth; DBS has variable responses 
with unclear mechanisms; crucially, existing treatments fail to 
coordinate ECS homeostasis, neurochemical balance, and neu-
ronal protection. Accumulating evidence identifies ECS dysfunc-
tion as a critical contributor to PD pathogenesis: Structurally, PD 
rat models show significant changes in ECS α  and λ , with 
increased tortuosity following α-syn oligomer-induced neuro-
degeneration [  158 ,  159 ]; functionally, ISF drainage is impaired 
in PD rats (especially in the substantia nigra and Cn), which can 
be partially reversed by levodopa treatment [  160 –  163 ].
   ECS modulation has been validated as an effective therapeutic 
strategy for PD. Mechanical vibration, photostimulation, and elec-
tromagnetic approaches can alter ECS architecture and molecular 
transport to improve brain function: Low-intensity FUS (LIFUS) 
expands ECS and PVS to facilitate small-molecule diffusion [ 94 ], 
and combining LIFUS with intravenous microbubbles enhances 
deep brain molecular transport without damaging the BBB [ 91 ]. 
Our previous work showed that high-frequency (130-Hz) subtha-
lamic nucleus (STN)-DBS remotely modulates ECS structure and 
ISF drainage in the substantia nigra of PD rats (reducing effective 
diffusion coefficient D* by 11.2%, shortening half-life T 1/2 by 15.7%, 
and increasing clearance coefficient k′ by 23.7%). Mechanistically, 
STN-DBS up-regulates HA content and AQP4 expression, restores 
excitatory amino acid transporter 2-mediated glutamate transport, 
accelerates ISF drainage and α-syn clearance, ultimately protects 
dopaminergic neurons [ 164 ]. These studies highlight the pivotal 
role of ECS dysfunction in PD and validate a therapeutic 
framework targeting ECS-mediated α -syn clearance, laying 
theoretical and technical foundations for ECS as a novel PD treat-
ment target.   
Glioma
   Gliomas are the most common primary malignant tumors of the 
CNS [  165 ,  166 ]. Gliomas typically exhibit expanded ECS volume 
and increased tortuosity, which are closely correlated with 
pathological grades: Low-grade gliomas have an α value of 0.29, 
whereas high-grade gliomas show an α value as high as 0.44 and 
a λ value increased to 1.78 (compared with normal brain tissue) 
[  167 ]. The overexpressed tenascin in the ECM, combined with 
interstitial fibrosis and vascular dysfunction, severely restricts the 
transportation of the neuroactive substances and therapeutic drug 
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 19]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 19
agents [  168 ]. Current clinical treatments mainly include surgery, 
radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and biotherapy. CED was approved 
by FDA for malignant glioma treatment in 2009 [ 146 ,  169 ,  170 ]. 
However, insufficient understanding of ECS substance transport 
anisotropy and hydrodynamic laws in clinical practice leads to a 
series of critical technical bottlenecks, including drug backflow, 
uncontrollable distribution range, and inability to perform precise 
quantitative therapy on tumor cells.
   The application of TB-MRI enables real-time monitoring of 
ECS substance transport, which is crucial for addressing techni-
cal limitations of CED. Notably, tumor growth significantly alters 
the pathways and velocities of ECS substance transport [ 168 ]. 
More importantly, machine-learning-based analysis of TB-MRI 
results has revealed that diffusion is the primary form of molecu-
lar transport in deep brain regions. Therefore, the concentration-
driven SDD method is expected to be more efficient than CED 
for chemotherapeutic drug delivery via the ECS pathway, provid-
ing a novel direction for precise glioma therapy.   
Multiple sclerosis
   Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic immune-mediated CNS 
demyelinating disorder characterized by multifocal demyelination, 
axonal injury, neurodegeneration, and heterogeneous progressive 
neurological deficits from autoreactive immune cell infiltration, 
myelin destruction, and impaired signal transmission [  171 ]. 
Recent studies confirm brain ECS functional abnormalities as key 
neural injury mechanisms: Demyelination disrupts the ECS 
parcellation barrier, triggering abnormal striatal ISF drainage into 
lesioned regions (striatal ECS structure unchanged but drainage 
half-life shortened by ~8%, reversible upon remyelination), and 
causing aberrant neuroactive substance distribution (especially 
in purine, arginine, and proline metabolism pathways), forming 
a “demyelination–ECS dysregulation–pathological accumulation–
neural injury” vicious cycle [ 33 , 58 ]. Current MS therapies (immu-
nomodulatory and remyelination-promoting, neuroprotective, 
and symptomatic care) have substantial limitations despite indi-
rect ECS associations: lack of ECS as a core target (failing to block 
the pathological cascade), confined indirect effects (direct roles 
in ECS barrier repair/ISF drainage unclarified), imbalanced 
synergistic regulation (no targeted intervention for ECS-induced 
metabolic abnormalities), and absence of precise ECS function 
assessment systems [ 58 ].
   Han et al. first confirmed the efficacy of ECS pathway-based 
treatment for MS, providing novel precise targeting strategies. 
Using a unilateral demyelination rat model and TB-MRI, they veri-
fied the critical pathological role of ECS parcellation barrier disrup-
tion and abnormal ISF drainage and found that remyelination can 
reverse ECS functional abnormalities [ 58 ]. Further research 
revealed that metabolic pathway abnormalities induced by ECS 
barrier impairment are directly correlated with inflammation and 
neural injury, laying a theoretical foundation for targeted modula-
tion of the ECS metabolic microenvironment to block pathological 
progression. Future research should focus on strengthening the 
exploration of ECS targeting mechanisms, developing ECS-
targeted intervention approaches, and establishing multitarget 
synergistic regimens combining ECS regulation with existing 
immunomodulation and remyelination-promoting and neuro-
protective therapies to improve the MS treatment system.   
Schizophrenia
   The pathophysiological mechanisms of schizophrenia (SCZ) 
remain incompletely elucidated, with mainstream hypotheses 
focusing on neural circuit dysfunction (dopaminergic hyper-
activation and glutamatergic hypoactivity), synaptic dysfunc-
tion, and chronic neuroinflammation [  172 –  176 ]. Recently, ECS 
integrity has been recognized as a critical regulatory factor: 
AQP4 gene polymorphisms linked to SCZ risk disrupt CSF–ISF 
exchange and prolong inflammation [  177 ,  178 ]; enlarged cho-
roid plexus in patients with somatic symptom disorder impairs 
glymphatic clearance and exacerbates symptoms [  179 –  181 ]; 
neuroimaging shows reduced perivascular ECS diffusion and 
imbalanced vasculature–CSF coupling in patients with SCZ 
[  182 –  186 ]. Current treatments (antipsychotics, electroconvul-
sive therapy, and rTMS) target cellular/neural circuit levels, 
with limitations including neglect of extracellular microenvi-
ronment pathology and low drug delivery efficiency due to 
BBB/ECS obstructions, leading to 30% treatment-resistant 
cases with persistent cognitive impairments [  187 ].
   ECS-based targeted interventions offer a promising direc-
tion for SCZ therapy. ECS-mediated precise diffusion drug 
delivery can bypass BBB constraints; under tracing technique 
guidance, lower doses can achieve better drug enrichment in 
target brain regions, potentially enhancing efficacy and reduc-
ing adverse effects. AQP4 modulators and anti-inflammatory 
drugs are expected to restore ECS fluid transport function and 
alleviate inflammation-related obstructions, providing new ideas 
for improving negative symptoms and cognitive dysfunction. 
To advance relevant research systematically, the following opti-
mizations are needed: (a) focus on core SCZ populations to 
explore the potential applications and mechanisms of ECS 
regulatory technologies; (b) investigate the combination of 
ECS-targeted strategies with existing treatments; (c) strengthen 
basic mechanistic research to clarify the interactions between 
ECS pathological changes, neural circuits, and the BBB.   
Epilepsy
   Epilepsy is a chronic neurological disorder characterized by 
abnormal synchronous neuronal discharges and recurrent 
seizures, with a pathophysiological core of excitation–inhibi-
tion imbalance that drives global network oscillations [  188 ,  189 ]. 
Postepisode plasticity changes and ion homeostasis disruption 
form a disease progression vicious cycle [  190 –  192 ]. Currently, 
antiepileptic drugs are first-line therapy (controlling seizures 
in ~70% patients), with surgical resection and neuromodula-
tion (e.g., vagus nerve stimulation and DBS) as complements 
for drug-resistant cases [  193 ]. However, therapeutic bottlenecks 
are increasingly linked to the ECS “physical barrier” hypothesis 
and diffusion parameter alterations [ 28 ]. Under chronic condi-
tions (e.g., temporal lobe epilepsy and status epilepticus), reac-
tive astrocyte proliferation and pathological ECM deposition 
drastically reduce epileptogenic cortex volume fraction (~30% 
reduction) with increased tortuosity and structural collapse 
[  194 ]. These changes impede drug diffusion, delay excitatory 
substance (glutamate and K+) clearance (local K+ >10 mM) to 
intensify synchronous discharges via electrical field coupling, 
reduce ECS efflux efficiency (e.g., abnormal AQP4) causing 
neurotoxic metabolite accumulation, and interact with seizure-
generated ROS/IL-1β to disrupt ECS integrity, forming a hyper-
excitable microenvironment that sustains disease progression 
[  195 –  199 ].
   Novel ECS-targeted therapeutic strategies emphasize “envi-
ronmental remodeling” , aiming to bypass synaptic drug resis-
tance by restoring ECS volume and ion homeostasis to block 
cascade reactions. Emerging technologies offer new approaches 
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 20]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 20
to overcoming ECS physical barriers: (a) Pulsed ultrasound 
modulates neural excitability and temporarily mechanically 
dilates ECS and PVS to enhance drug penetration and metabo-
lite clearance [  200 ]; (b) CED uses pressure gradients to deliver 
drugs directly into interstitial space, bypassing BBB and convo-
luted ECS [  201 ]; and (c) nanocarriers traverse convoluted ECS 
to precisely deliver drugs to epileptogenic zones while evading 
efflux transporters [  202 ]. In addition, Na–K–2Cl cotransporter 
isoform 1/K–Cl cotransporter isoform 2-targeted interventions 
(e.g., furosemide and bumetanide) suppress glial swelling and 
reverse ECS contraction, blocking induced discharges in animal 
models and suppressing interictal spikes clinically with reported 
50% seizure frequency reduction [  203 ,  204 ]; bumetanide phase 
II studies showed 70% seizure reduction, with ongoing BBB 
penetration optimization [  205 ]. Restoring ECS volume via high-
molecular-weight HA supplementation or osmotic adjustment 
(e.g., mannitol) is recommended as intraoperative/emergency 
strategy in international guidelines, with observational inhibi-
tion rate up to 80%.     
Conclusion and Future Directions
   With advances in imaging detection technologies, the integra-
tion of ECS into the formal brain science framework has pro-
gressively matured. However, the incorporation of ECS into the 
research system of neuroscience and brain disease treatment 
requires efforts across multiple dimensions. Precise and effective 
treatment of brain diseases necessitates comprehensive elucidation 
of their pathogenic and progressive processes and mechanisms, 
which, in turn, requires the enhancement and development of 
cross-scale structural information processing and analytical 
capabilities. As a key component of the brain ISS, the processes 
of substance transport within the ECS and its drainage back 
to the systemic circulation are intricate, requiring multimodal 
imaging technologies to cover all drainage pathways and their 
regulatory mechanisms.
   To establish a research system compatible with nanoscale 
ECS and microscale microvessels and neural cells, it is essential 
to develop synchronous information acquisition technologies 
and explore the application of simulation modeling to clarify 
the complex interactions among neurons, glial cells, ECS, and 
blood vessels. Advancement of cross-scale, multimodal brain 
detection technologies is imperative to fully reveal the mecha-
nisms of brain diseases and more rationally facilitate the pre-
clinical research and development design of novel drugs and 
medical devices.
   A pivotal step in translating ECS research into clinical practice 
is establishing human brain imaging and measurement systems 
for precise ECS quantification [ 8 , 16 , 18 , 23 , 50 ]. Both mechanistic 
studies of brain disorders and therapeutic efficacy assessments 
require technologies that can simultaneously measure cellular, 
extracellular, and vascular compartments. Adopting a “cell–
ECS–vasculature” framework holds promise for comprehen-
sively understanding the onset, progression, and outcome of 
neurological diseases [ 8 , 11 , 101 ,  206 –  208 ]. In multicenter clinical 
trials, relying on multicompartment imaging technology for 
human brain and embedding ECS parameters into regulatory 
assessments will enable the optimization of drug design and 
delivery strategies and establish a new framework for early-stage 
screening of compounds with superior spatial efficacy and safety.
   The historical neglect of the brain ECS stems fundamentally 
from limitations in early scientific understanding and investigative 
methodologies, which precluded the full recognition of its struc-
tural independence and functional significance. Consequently, the 
ECS was excluded from formal medical education curricula, with 
conventional courses in neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, neuro-
pathology, and neuropharmacology rarely acknowledging it as a 
distinct structural entity. Now that modern research has firmly 
established the ECS as a critical component of brain architecture 
with essential physiological roles, integrating ECS-related knowl-
edge into existing textbooks and embedding the “cell–ECS–
vasculature” model into both research paradigms and instructional 
frameworks will fundamentally reshape our understanding of the 
brain and neurological disorders [ 16 – 18 , 35 , 50 ]. Furthermore, the 
advancement of cross-scale, multimodal brain imaging and 
measurement technologies is indispensable for fully elucidating 
the complex interactive dynamics among neurons, glial cells, the 
ECS, and blood vessels. Against this backdrop, the establishment 
of a structurally complete, ECS-integrated neuroscience paradigm 
has become a highly anticipated goal for the entire field.   
Acknowledgments
   Funding: This work was supported in part by the Major 
Program of the National Natural Science Foundation of China 
(nos. 62394314, 62394311,62394312,62394313, 62394310, and 
T2442017). We thank M. Jiang, Y . Fu, Z. Tong, Y . Hou, C. Li, 
J. Zhang, C. Wang, H. Liu, Y . Gao, Z. Xie, X. Liu, and B. Xiong 
for invaluable contributions.
   Author contributions: H.H.: Conceptualization, formal 
analysis, methodology, investigation, resources, visualization, 
writing—original draft, writing—review and editing, supervision, 
project administration, and funding acquisition. H.D.: Data 
curation, methodology, investigation, writing—original draft, 
and writing—review and editing. L.S.L.: Writing—review and 
editing. R.N.: Writing—review and editing. B.F .C.: Writing—
review and editing. Y . Song: Data curation and writing—review 
and editing. H.T.: Data curation, methodology, investigation, 
and writing—original draft. M.X.: Investigation and visualiza-
tion. H.L.: Data curation, formal analysis, methodology, inves-
tigation, and visualization. S.L.: Data curation and visualization. 
Z.Y .: Writing—review and editing. T.G.: Methodology, visual-
ization, and writing—original draft. M.Z.: Data curation, 
methodology, and writing—original draft. Y . Shi: Investigation. 
J.S.: Investigation. Y .Z.: Investigation. W .F .: Formal analysis, 
methodology, investigation, visualization, writing—original 
draft, and writing—review and editing.
   Competing interests:  The authors declare that they have no 
competing interests.   
Data Availability
   The data supporting the findings of this review are available 
from public domains and clinical trial databases. Specifically, 
the clinical trial data for AD and PD presented in Fig.  1  were 
retrieved from ClinicalTrials.gov ( https://clinicaltrials.gov/ ). 
The bibliometric analysis data presented in Fig. S1 were derived 
from the Elsevier Scopus database.  
References
 1. Pang JC, Aquino KM, Oldehinkel M, Robinson PA, Fulcher BD, 
Breakspear M, Fornito A. Geometric constraints on human 
brain function. Nature. 2023;618(7965):566–574.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 21]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 21
 2. Girardeau G, Lopes-Dos-Santos V . Brain neural patterns and 
the memory function of sleep. Science. 2021;374(6567):560–564.
 3. Moutinho S. The long road to a cure for Alzheimer’s disease is 
paved with failures. Nat Med. 2022;28(11):2228–2231.
 4. Cummings JL, Zhou Y , Lee G, Zhong K, Fonseca J,  
Leisgang-Osse AM, Cheng F . Alzheimer’s disease 
drug development pipeline: 2025. Alzheimers Dement. 
2025;11(2):e70098.
 5. Nutt DJ. Drug development in psychiatry: 50 years of failure 
and how to resuscitate it. Lancet Psychiatry. 2025;12(3): 
228–238.
 6. Fisher M. New approaches to neuroprotective drug 
development. Stroke. 2011;42(1 Suppl):S24–S27.
 7. Brannigan JFM, Fry A, Opie NL, Campbell BCV ,  
Mitchell PJ, Oxley TJ. Endovascular brain-computer 
interfaces in poststroke paralysis. Stroke. 2024;55(2):474–483.
 8. Lei YM, Han H, Yuan F , Javeed A, Zhao Y . The brain 
interstitial system: Anatomy, modeling, in vivo measurement, 
and applications. Prog Neurobiol. 2017;157:230–246.
 9. Deitmer JW , Rose CR. pH regulation and proton signalling by 
glial cells. Prog Neurobiol. 1996;48(2):73–103.
 10. Fuxe K, Dahlström AB, Jonsson G, Marcellino D,  
Guescini M, Dam M, Manger P , Agnati L. The discovery of 
central monoamine neurons gave volume transmission to the 
wired brain. Prog Neurobiol. 2010;90(2):82–100.
 11. Han H, Xia Z, Chen H, Hou C, Li W . Simple diffusion 
delivery via brain interstitial route for the treatment of 
cerebral ischemia. Sci China Life Sci. 2011;54(3):235–239.
 12. Zhao D, Wang J, Zhu Y , Zhang H, Ni C, Zhao Z, Dai J, He R,  
Liu G, Gan C, et al. Targeting the glymphatic system: Aβ 
accumulation and phototherapy strategies across different 
stages of Alzheimer’s disease. Transl Neurodegener. 
2025;14(1):49.
 13. Liu E, Peng X, Ma H, Zhang Y , Y ang X, Zhang Y , Sun L,  
Y an J. The involvement of aquaporin-4 in the interstitial fluid 
drainage impairment following subarachnoid hemorrhage. 
Front Aging Neurosci. 2020;12:Article 611494.
 14. Nicholson C, Kamali-Zare P , Tao L. Brain extracellular space 
as a diffusion barrier. Comput Vis Sci. 2011;14(7):309–325.
 15. Milhorat T. The third circulation revisited. J Neurosurg. 
1975;42(6):628–645.
 16. Nicholson C, Phillips JM. Ion diffusion modified by tortuosity 
and volume fraction in the extracellular microenvironment of 
the rat cerebellum. J Physiol. 1981;321:225–257.
 17. Huang XR, Li K, Liu Y , Y ang C, Han H. Quantitative 
measurement of brain extracellular space with three-
dimensional electron microscopy imaging. Sens Imaging. 
2023;24(1):2.
 18. Y ang CQ, Xie J, Huang X, Tan H, Li Q, Tang Z, Ma X, Lu J, 
He Q, Fu W , et al. ECS-Net: Extracellular space segmentation 
with contrastive and shape-aware loss by using cryo-electron 
microscopy imaging. Expert Syst Appl. 2025;270:126370.
 19. Arizono M, Inavalli VVGK, Bancelin S, Fernández-
Monreal M, Nägerl UV . Super-resolution shadow imaging 
reveals local remodeling of astrocytic microstructures and 
brain extracellular space after osmotic challenge. Glia. 
2021;69(6):1605–1613.
 20. Lopez-Munoz F , Boya J, Alamo C. Neuron theory, the 
cornerstone of neuroscience, on the centenary of the Nobel 
Prize award to Santiago Ramon y Cajal. Brain Res Bull. 
2006;70(4–6):391–405.
 21. Vanharreveld A, Crowell J, Malhotra SK. A study of 
extracellular space in central nervous tissue by freeze-
substitution. J Cell Biol. 1965;25(1):117–137.
 22. Mullard A. Is the FDA ’s plan to phase out animal toxicity 
testing realistic? Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2025;24(6):413–414.
 23. Nicholson C, Hrabetova S. Brain extracellular space: The final 
frontier of neuroscience. Biophys J. 2017;113(10):2133–2142.
 24. Vinje V , Zapf B, Ringstad G, Eide PK, Rognes ME,  
Mardal KA. Human brain solute transport quantified by 
glymphatic MRI-informed biophysics during sleep and sleep 
deprivation. Fluids Barriers CNS. 2023;20(1):62.
 25. Nicholson C, Tao L. Hindered diffusion of high molecular 
weight compounds in brain extracellular microenvironment 
measured with integrative optical imaging. Biophys J. 
1993;65(6):2277–2290.
 26. Han H, Shi C, Fu Y , Zuo L, Lee K, He Q, Han H. A novel 
MRI tracer-based method for measuring water diffusion in 
the extracellular space of the rat brain. IEEE J Biomed Health 
Inform. 2014;18(3):978–983.
 27. Bear J. Dynamics of fluids in porous media. New Y ork: Dover 
Publications; 1972. p. 112–115. 
 28. Sykova E, Nicholson C. Diffusion in brain extracellular space. 
Physiol Rev. 2008;88(4):1277–1340.
 29. Nicholson C, Sykova E. Extracellular space structure revealed 
by diffusion analysis. Trends Neurosci. 1998;21(5):207–215.
 30. Rice ME, Okada YC, Nicholson C. Anisotropic and 
heterogeneous diffusion in the turtle cerebellum: Implications 
for volume transmission. J Neurophysiol. 1993;70(5):2035–2044.
 31. Thorne RG, Nicholson C. In vivo diffusion analysis 
with quantum dots and dextrans predicts the width 
of brain extracellular space. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2006;103(14):5567–5572.
 32. Godin AG, Varela JA, Gao Z, Danné N, Dupuis JP ,  
Lounis B, Groc L, Cognet L. Single-nanotube tracking reveals 
the nanoscale organization of the extracellular space in the 
live brain. Nat Nanotechnol. 2017;12(3):238–243.
 33. Wang A, Wang R, Cui D, Huang X, Yuan L, Liu H, Fu Y ,  
Lang L, Wang W , He Q, et al. The drainage of interstitial fluid 
in the deep brain is controlled by the integrity of myelination. 
Aging Dis. 2019;10(5):937–948.
 34. Ray L, Iliff JJ, Heys JJ. Analysis of convective and diffusive 
transport in the brain interstitium. Fluids Barriers CNS. 
2019;16(1):6.
 35. Xie JY , Li H, Su S, Cheng J, Cai Q, Tan H, Zu L, Qu X, 
Han H. Quantitative analysis of molecular transport in the 
extracellular space using physics-informed neural network. 
Comput Biol Med. 2024;171:Article 108133.
 36. Helmstaedter M, Briggman KL, Turaga SC, Jain V , Seung HS, 
Denk W . Connectomic reconstruction of the inner plexiform 
layer in the mouse retina. Nature. 2013;500(7461):168–174.
 37. Shapson-Coe A, Januszewski M, Berger DR, Pope A, Wu Y , 
Blakely T, Schalek RL, Li RH, Wang S, Maitin-Shepard J, et al. 
A petavoxel fragment of human cerebral cortex reconstructed 
at nanoscale resolution. Science. 2024;384(6696):eadk4858.
 38. Motta A, Berning M, Boergens KM, Staffler B, Beining M, 
Loomba S, Hennig P , Wissler H, Helmstaedter M. Dense 
connectomic reconstruction in layer 4 of the somatosensory 
cortex. Science. 2019;366(6469):eaay3134.
 39. Hrabe J, Hrabetova S. Time-resolved integrative optical 
imaging of diffusion during spreading depression. Biophys J. 
2019;117(10):1783–1794.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 22]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 22
 40. Paviolo C, Ferreira JS, Lee A, Hunter D, Calaresu I, Nandi S, 
Groc L, Cognet L. Near-infrared carbon nanotube tracking 
reveals the nanoscale extracellular space around synapses. 
Nano Lett. 2022;22(17):6849–6856.
 41. Calovi S, Soria FN, Tonnesen J. Super-resolution 
STED microscopy in live brain tissue. Neurobiol Dis. 
2021;156:Article 105420.
 42. Schnell C. Illuminating the brain’s dark matter. Nat Methods. 
2018;15(4):241–241.
 43. Lian JG, Y ang L, Tan H, Su S, Serrano Lopes L, Cheng F ,  
Y an J, Fu Y , Fu W , Xie Z, et al. A novel neuroprotective 
method against ischemic stroke by accelerating the drainage 
of brain interstitial fluid. Sci China Life Sci. 2024;67(10): 
2213–2223.
 44. Y ang L, Gao Y , Lopes LS, Lian J, Fu W , Tan H, Y ang S, Xie Z, 
Huang Y , Zhang J, et al. Accelerated molecular transportation 
in the brain extracellular space with 755-nm light attenuates 
post-stroke cognitive impairment in rats. Cyborg Bionic Syst. 
2025;6:0262.
 45. Kung MP , Hou C, Zhuang Z-P , Cross AJ, Maier DL, Kung HF . 
Characterization of IMPY as a potential imaging agent for 
beta-amyloid plaques in double transgenic PSAPP mice. Eur J 
Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2004;31(8):1136–1145.
 46. Taoka T, Ito R, Nakamichi R, Nakane T, Kawai H,  
Naganawa S. Diffusion tensor image analysis along the 
perivascular space (DTI-ALPS): Revisiting the meaning 
and significance of the method. Magn Reson Med Sci. 
2024;23(3):268–290.
 47. Zhang H, Schneider T, Wheeler-Kingshott CA,  
Alexander DC. NODDI: Practical in vivo neurite orientation 
dispersion and density imaging of the human brain. 
NeuroImage. 2012;61(4):1000–1016.
 48. Figini M, Castellano A, Bailo M, Callea M, Cadioli M, 
Bouyagoub S, Palombo M, Pieri V , Mortini P , Falini A, et al.  
Comprehensive brain tumour characterisation with 
VERDICT-MRI: Evaluation of cellular and vascular measures 
validated by histology. Cancers. 2023;15(9):2490.
 49. Panagiotaki E, Walker-Samuel S, Siow B, Johnson SP , 
Rajkumar V , Pedley RB, Lythgoe MF , Alexander DC. 
Noninvasive quantification of solid tumor microstructure 
using VERDICT MRI. Cancer Res. 2014;74(7):1902–1912.
 50. Li C, Shi Y , He M, Niu SY , He Q, Liu J, Fu W , Long Y , Han H. 
Tractography of brain extracellular space and nerve fibers via 
multicompartment decoupling imaging (MDI). Sens Imaging. 
2025;26(1):151.
 51. Taoka T, Masutani Y , Kawai H, Nakane T, Matsuoka K,  
Y asuno F , Kishimoto T, Naganawa S. Evaluation of glymphatic 
system activity with the diffusion MR technique: Diffusion 
tensor image analysis along the perivascular space (DTI-ALPS) 
in Alzheimer’s disease cases. Jpn J Radiol. 2017;35(4):172–178.
 52. Li S, Chen R, Cao Z, Zhu Q, Ma Y , Zhu K, Lin Z, Wu D, 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Microstructural 
bias in the assessment of periventricular flow as revealed in 
postmortem brains. Radiology. 2025;316(3):Article e250753.
 53. Hongbin H. Imaging and measuring cellular, vascular, and 
extracellular compartments in the human brain using MDI: 
Technical breakthrough and prospects. Sci China Life Sci. 
2025. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11427-025-3174-0
 54. Arraez-Aybar LA, Fuentes-Redondo T, Millan JM. Persistent 
trigeminal artery: A cross-sectional study based on over  
3 years conventional angiography, CT angiography and MR 
angiography images. Surg Radiol Anat. 2016;38(4):445–453.
 55. Nieuwenhuys R, Broere CAJ. A detailed comparison of the 
cytoarchitectonic and myeloarchitectonic maps of the human 
neocortex produced by the Vogt-Vogt school. Brain Struct 
Funct. 2020;225(9):2717–2733.
 56. Tatu L, Moulin T, Bogousslavsky J, Duvernoy H. Arterial 
territories of human brain: Brainstem and cerebellum. 
Neurology. 1996;47(5):1125–1135.
 57. Han H, Li K, Y an JH, Zhu K, Fu Y . An in vivo study with 
an MRI tracer method reveals the biophysical properties 
of interstitial fluid in the rat brain. Sci China Life Sci. 
2012;55(9):782–787.
 58. Cheng Y , Liu J, Tian F , Tan H, Wang T, Lu J, Tang Z,  
Ma X, Lian J, Su S, et al. New insight into the mechanism of 
neurochemical imbalance in multiple sclerosis: Abnormal 
transportation of brain extracellular space. Aging Dis. 2025; 
10.14336/AD.2024.1.
 59. Wang R, Han H, Shi K, Alberts IL, Rominger A, Y ang C,  
Y an J, Cui D, Peng Y , He Q, et al. The alteration of brain 
interstitial fluid drainage with myelination development. 
Aging Dis. 2021;12(7):1729–1740.
 60. Kress BT, Iliff JJ, Xia M, Wang M, Wei HS, Zeppenfeld D,  
Xie L, Kang H, Xu Q, Liew JA, et al. Impairment of 
paravascular clearance pathways in the aging brain. Ann 
Neurol. 2014;76(6):845–861.
 61. Zhou Y , Cai J, Zhang W , Gong X, Y an S, Zhang K, Luo Z,  
Sun J, Jiang Q, Lou M. Impairment of the glymphatic pathway 
and putative meningeal lymphatic vessels in the aging human. 
Ann Neurol. 2020;87(3):357–369.
 62. Li Y , Han H, Shi K, Cui D, Y ang J, Alberts IL, Yuan L,  
Zhao G, Wang R, Cai X, et al. The mechanism of 
downregulated interstitial fluid drainage following neuronal 
excitation. Aging Dis. 2020;11(6):1407–1422.
 63. Zhao G, Han H, Y ang J, Sun M, Cui D, Li Y , Gao Y , Zou J.  
Brain interstitial fluid drainage and extracellular space 
affected by inhalational isoflurane: In comparison with 
intravenous sedative dexmedetomidine and pentobarbital 
sodium. Sci China Life Sci. 2020;63(9):1363–1379.
 64. Lilius TO, Blomqvist K, Hauglund NL, Liu G, Stæger FF , 
Bærentzen S, Du T, Ahlstrom F , Backman JT, Kalso EA,  
et al. Dexmedetomidine enhances glymphatic brain delivery 
of intrathecally administered drugs. J Control Release. 
2019;304:29–38.
 65. Afridi R, Rahman MH, Suk K. Implications of glial metabolic 
dysregulation in the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative 
diseases. Neurobiol Dis. 2022;174:Article 105874.
 66. Walch E, Bilas A, Bebawy V , Lam A, Murphy TR, Sriram S, 
Fiacco TA. Contributions of astrocyte and neuronal volume 
to CA1 neuron excitability changes in elevated extracellular 
potassium. Front Cell Neurosci. 2022;16:Article 930384.
 67. Masquelier T, Deco G. Network bursting dynamics 
in excitatory cortical neuron cultures results from the 
combination of different adaptive mechanisms. PLOS ONE. 
2013;8(10):Article e75824.
 68. Focke PJ, Wang X, Larsson HP . Neurotransmitter transporters: 
Structure meets function. Structure. 2013;21(5):694–705.
 69. Lovinger DM. Communication networks in the brain: 
Neurons, receptors, neurotransmitters, and alcohol. Alcohol 
Res Health. 2008;31(3):196–214.
 70. Xie L, Kang H, Xu Q, Chen MJ, Liao Y , Thiyagarajan M, 
O’Donnell J, Christensen DJ, Nicholson C, Iliff JJ, et al. Sleep 
drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain. Science. 
2013;342(6156):373–377.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 23]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 23
 71. Jiang-Xie LF , Drieu A, Bhasiin K, Quintero D, Smirnov I,  
Kinis J. Neuronal dynamics direct cerebrospinal fluid perfusion 
and brain clearance. Nature. 2024;627(8002):157–164.
 72. Wostyn P , Goddaer P . Can meditation-based approaches 
improve the cleansing power of the glymphatic system? 
Explor Neuroprotective Ther. 2022;2(3):110–117.
 73. Teng Z, Wang A, Wang P , Wang R, Wang W , Han H. The 
effect of aquaporin-4 knockout on interstitial fluid flow and 
the structure of the extracellular space in the deep brain. 
Aging Dis. 2018;9(5):808–816.
 74. Iliff JJ, Wang M, Zeppenfeld DM, Venkataraman A, Plog BA, 
Liao Y , Deane R, Nedergaard M. Cerebral arterial pulsation 
drives paravascular CSF-interstitial fluid exchange in the 
murine brain. J Neurosci. 2013;33(46):18190–18199.
 75. Bedussi B, Naessens DMP , de Vos J, Olde Engberink R, 
Wilhelmus MMM, Richard E, Ten Hove M, vanBavel E, 
Bakker ENTP . Enhanced interstitial fluid drainage in the 
hippocampus of spontaneously hypertensive rats. Sci Rep. 
2017;7(1):744.
 76. Kandimalla M, Lim S, Thakkar J, Dewan S, Kang D, In MH, 
Jo HJ, Jang DP , Nedelska Z, Lapid MI, et al. Cardiorespiratory 
dynamics in the brain: Review on the significance of 
cardiovascular and respiratory correlates in functional MRI 
signal. NeuroImage. 2025;306:Article 121000.
 77. Kiviniemi V , Wang X, Korhonen V , Keinänen T, Tuovinen T, 
Autio J, LeVan P , Keilholz S, Zang YF , Hennig J, et al. Ultra-
fast magnetic resonance encephalography of physiological 
brain activity - Glymphatic pulsation mechanisms? J Cereb 
Blood Flow Metab. 2016;36(6):1033–1045.
 78. Rasmussen MK, Mestre H, Nedergaard M. Fluid transport in 
the brain. Physiol Rev. 2022;102(2):1025–1151.
 79. Kim K, Abramishvili D, du S, Papadopoulos Z, Cao J,  
Herz J, Smirnov I, Thomas JL, Colonna M, Kipnis J. 
Meningeal lymphatics-microglia axis regulates synaptic 
physiology. Cell. 2025;188(10):2705–2719.e23.
 80. Smyth LCD, Xu D, Okar S, Dykstra T, Rustenhoven J, 
Papadopoulos Z, Bhasiin K, Kim MW , Drieu A,  
Mamuladze T. Identification of direct connections between 
the dura and the brain. Nature. 2024;627(8002):165–173.
 81. Stepanov YV , Golovynska I, Zhang R, Golovynskyi S, 
Stepanova LI, Gorbach O, Dovbynchuk T, Garmanchuk LV ,  
Ohulchanskyy TY , Qu J. Near-infrared light reduces 
β-amyloid-stimulated microglial toxicity and enhances 
survival of neurons: Mechanisms of light therapy for 
Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Res Ther. 2022;14(1):84.
 82. Yue X, Mei Y , Zhang Y , Tong Z, Cui D, Y ang J, Wang A,  
Wang R, Fei X, Ai L, et al. New insight into Alzheimer’s 
disease: Light reverses Aβ-obstructed interstitial fluid 
flow and ameliorates memory decline in APP/PS1 mice. 
Alzheimers Dement. 2019;5:671–684.
 83. Hamblin MR. Photobiomodulation for traumatic brain injury 
and stroke. J Neurosci Res. 2018;96(4):731–743.
 84. Wang M, Y an C, Li X, Y ang T, Wu S, Liu Q, Luo Q, Zhou F. Non-
invasive modulation of meningeal lymphatics ameliorates 
ageing and Alzheimer’s disease-associated pathology and 
cognition in mice. Nat Commun. 2024;15(1):1453.
 85. Xia Y , Khalid W , Yin Z, Huang G, Bikson M, Fu BM. Modulation of 
solute diffusivity in brain tissue as a novel mechanism of transcranial 
direct current stimulation (tDCS). Sci Rep. 2020;10(1):18488.
 86. Wang Y , Monai H. Transcranial direct current stimulation 
alters cerebrospinal fluid-interstitial fluid exchange in mouse 
brain. Brain Stimul. 2024;17(3):620–632.
 87. Liang PZ, Li L, Zhang YN, Shen Y , Zhang LL, Zhou J, Wang ZJ, 
Wang S, Y ang S. Electroacupuncture improves clearance of 
amyloid-β through the glymphatic system in the SAMP8 mouse 
model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neural Plast. 2021;2021:9960304.
 88. Liu DX, He X, Wu D, Zhang Q, Y ang C, Liang F-Y , He X-F , Dai G-Y ,  
Pei Z, Lan Y , et al. Continuous theta burst stimulation facilitates 
the clearance efficiency of the glymphatic pathway in a mouse 
model of sleep deprivation. Neurosci Lett. 2017;653:189–194.
 89. Curley CT, Mead BP , Negron K, Kim N, Garrison WJ,  
Miller GW , Kingsmore KM, Thim EA, Song J, Munson JM,  
et al. Augmentation of brain tumor interstitial flow via 
focused ultrasound promotes brain-penetrating nanoparticle 
dispersion and transfection. Sci Adv. 2020;6(18):eaay1344.
 90. Choi S, Kum J, Hyun SY , Park TY , Kim H, Kim SK, Kim J.  
Transcranial focused ultrasound stimulation enhances 
cerebrospinal fluid movement: Real-time in vivo two-photon and 
widefield imaging evidence. Brain Stimul. 2024;17(5):1119–1130.
 91. Y e D, Chen S, Liu Y , Weixel C, Hu Z, Yuan J, Chen H. 
Mechanically manipulating glymphatic transport by 
ultrasound combined with microbubbles. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA. 2023;120(21):Article e2212933120.
 92. Hou X, Jing J, Jiang Y , Huang X, Xian Q, Lei T, Zhu J,  
Wong KF , Zhao X, Su M, et al. Nanobubble-actuated 
ultrasound neuromodulation for selectively shaping behavior 
in mice. Nat Commun. 2024;15(1):2253.
 93. Rezai AR, D’Haese P-F , Finomore V , Carpenter J, Ranjan M, 
Wilhelmsen K, Mehta RI, Wang P , Najib U, Teixeira CVL,  
et al. Ultrasound blood-brain barrier opening and aducanumab 
in Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med. 2024;390(1):55–62.
 94. Hersh AM, Bhimreddy M, Weber-Levine C, Jiang K,  
Alomari S, Theodore N, Manbachi A, Tyler BM. Applications 
of focused ultrasound for the treatment of glioblastoma: A 
new frontier. Cancers. 2022;14(19):4920.
 95. Cai X, He Q, Wang W , Li C, Wang H, Yin F , Li T, Kong D,  
Jia Y , Li H, et al. Epidural pulsation accelerates the drainage of 
brain interstitial fluid. Aging Dis. 2023;14(1):219–228.
 96. John A, Reddy PH. Synaptic basis of Alzheimer’s disease: 
Focus on synaptic amyloid beta, P-tau and mitochondria. 
Ageing Res Rev. 2021;65:Article 101208.
 97. Xu J, He Z, Pan Y , Cao B, Chen G. Nanotherapeutic 
potential of Baicalein-encapsulated hUC-MSC exosomes 
in Alzheimer’s disease: Modulating oxidative stress and 
neuroinflammation. Biomater Adv. 2026;181:Article 214619.
 98. Shi Y , Zhang H, Cong S, Zhu X, Liu Y , Li J, Tang K, Xue R,  
Liu X, Tan Z, et al. Benzylpiperidine-pyridazin-3(2H)-
one derivatives as potential multifunctional agents against 
Alzheimer’s disease. Eur J Med Chem. 2026;303:Article 118437.
 99. Makhaeva GF , Grishchenko MV , Rudakova EV , Kovaleva NV , 
Boltneva NP , Skornyakova TS, Khudina OG, Shchegolkov EV ,  
Zhilina EF , Astakhova TY , et al. Synthesis, biological 
evaluation, and in silico studies of pyridoxal-amiridine 
hybrids as multitargeting anti-Alzheimer’s disease agents. Eur 
J Med Chem. 2026;303:Article 118397.
 100. Zhang Y , Li Z, Guan H, Qiu Z, Zou C. Engineering exosomes 
for Alzheimer’s disease: Multi-target therapeutic strategies 
from pathogenesis to clinical translation. Clin Transl Med. 
2025;15(12):Article e70548.
 101. Gu Z, Chen H, Zhao H, Y ang W , Song Y , Li X, Wang Y , 
du D, Liao H, Pan W , et al. New insight into brain disease 
therapy: Nanomedicines-crossing blood-brain barrier and 
extracellular space for drug delivery. Expert Opin Drug Deliv. 
2022;19(12):1618–1635.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 24]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 24
 102. Kou Y , Zhao H, Cui D, Han H, Tong Z. Formaldehyde 
toxicity in age-related neurological dementia. Ageing Res Rev. 
2022;73:Article 101512.
 103. Zhao D, Wang J, Zhang F , Wang Q, Zang M, Niu H,  
Tong Z. Cerebral glymphatic system: Structure, regulation, 
ageing, and mechanisms of encephalopathy. Ageing Res Rev. 
2025;114:Article 102986.
 104. Fenstermacher J, Kaye T. Drug “diffusion” within the brain. 
Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1988;531:29–39.
 105. Mangialasche F , Solomon A, Winblad B, Mecocci P ,  
Kivipelto M. Alzheimer’s disease: Clinical trials and drug 
development. Lancet Neurol. 2010;9(7):702–716.
 106. Hou X, Qiu Z, Xian Q, Kala S, Jing J, Wong KF , Zhu J, Guo J, 
Zhu T, Y ang M, et al. Precise ultrasound neuromodulation in 
a deep brain region using nano gas vesicles as actuators. Adv 
Sci. 2021;8(21):Article e2101934.
 107. Luo Q, Y e X, Xu J, Sun Z, Wang P , Chen H, Gao T, Deng Q, 
Wang Z, Wang Q, et al. Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound 
enhances delivery of 30 nm Q10 for improving mental and 
memory disorder in APP/PS1 mice. Drug Deliv Transl Res. 
2025;15(10):3497–3516.
 108. National Medical Products Administration. Announcement on 
technical guidelines for clinical trials of drugs for acute ischemic 
atroke (no. 28 of 2018). 9 February 2018. Accessed 1 December 
2025. https://www.nmpa.gov.cn/directory/web/nmpa/xxgk/
ggtg/ypggtg/ypqtggtg/20180209175801578.html (in Chinese).
 109. International Council for Harmonisation. ICH E4 Dose 
response information to support drug registration - Scientific 
guideline. 1 November 1994. Accessed 1 December 2025. 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/ich-e4-dose-response-
information-support-drug-registration-scientific-guideline
 110. Clark WM, Clark TD. Stroke: Treatment for acute stroke—The 
end of the citicoline saga. Nat Rev Neurol. 2012;8(9):484–485.
 111. Banks W A. From blood-brain barrier to blood-brain 
interface: New opportunities for CNS drug delivery. Nat Rev 
Drug Discov. 2016;15(4):275–292.
 112. Shankar GM, Li S, Mehta TH, Garcia-Munoz A,  
Shepardson NE, Smith I, Brett FM, Farrell MA, Rowan MJ, 
Lemere CA, et al. Amyloid-β protein dimers isolated directly 
from Alzheimer’s brains impair synaptic plasticity and 
memory. Nat Med. 2008;14(8):837–842.
 113. Gibbons GS, Lee VMY , Trojanowski JQ. Mechanisms of 
cell-to-cell transmission of pathological tau: A review. JAMA 
Neurol. 2019;76(1):101–108.
 114. Chen Y , Ding L, Gu Z, Tian Z, Gao T, Zhou F , Zhang S,  
Tong Z. Aβ deposition in extracellular space disrupts glial-
neuron communication and triggers Alzheimer’s disease. 
Aging Dis. 2025; 10.14336/AD.2025.0873.
 115. Y ang L, Wu C, Parker E, Li Y , Dong Y , Tucker L, Brann DW ,  
Lin HW , Zhang Q. Non-invasive photobiomodulation 
treatment in an Alzheimer disease-like transgenic rat model. 
Theranostics. 2022;12(5):2205–2231.
 116. Zhang J, Yue X, Luo H, Jiang W , Mei Y , Ai L, Gao G, Wu Y ,  
Y ang H, An J, et al. Illumination with 630 nm red light 
reduces oxidative stress and restores memory by photo-
activating catalase and formaldehyde dehydrogenase in 
SAMP8 mice. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2019;30(11): 
1432–1449.
 117. Meng C, He Z, Xing D. Low-level laser therapy rescues 
dendrite atrophy via upregulating BDNF expression: 
Implications for Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci. 
2013;33(33):13505–13517.
 118. Gregorio ED, Staelens M, Hosseinkhah N, Karimpoor M,  
Liburd J, Lim L, Shankar K, Tuszyński JA. Raman 
spectroscopy reveals photobiomodulation-induced α-helix 
to β-sheet transition in tubulins: Potential implications 
for Alzheimer’s and other neurodegenerative diseases. 
Nanomaterials. 2024;14(13):1093.
 119. Mitolo M, Tonon C, Morgia CL, Testa C, Carelli V , Lodi R. 
Effects of light treatment on sleep, cognition, mood, and 
behavior in Alzheimer’s disease: A systematic review. Dement 
Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2018;46(5–6):371–384.
 120. De Maio A, Lin F-H, Stefanovic B, O’Reilly AM. Tissue-type 
differences in focused ultrasound and microbubble-mediated 
drug delivery to the brain exist at vessel level. Theranostics. 
2026;16(4):1975–1996.
 121. Yuan B. Interstitial fluid streaming in deep tissue induced by 
ultrasound momentum transfer for accelerating nanoagent 
transport and controlling its distribution. Phys Med Biol. 
2022;67(17):10.
 122. Lee S, Kum J, Kim K, Park TY , Ko H, Na DL, Kang SY ,  
Kim H, Kim Y , Kim J. Clearance of amyloid plaque via 
focused ultrasonication in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Theranostics. 2026;16(5):2310–2323.
 123. Chen X, Dong GY , Wang LX. High-frequency transcranial 
magnetic stimulation protects APP/PS1 mice against 
Alzheimer’s disease progress by reducing APOE and enhancing 
autophagy. Brain Behav. 2020;10(8):Article e01740.
 124. Fassbender RV , Kehm C, Otta AL, Fink GR, Onur OA. 
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation enhances alpha 
power in Alzheimer’s disease patients. J Alzheimer’s Dis. 
2025;109(3):13872877251406972.
 125. Antonioni A, Martorana A, Santarnecchi E, Hampel H,  
Koch G. The neurobiological foundation of effective repetitive 
transcranial magnetic brain stimulation in Alzheimer’s 
disease. Alzheimers Dement. 2025;21(6):Article e70337.
 126. Liang X, Xue C, Zheng D, Yuan Q, Qi W , Ruan Y , Chen S, 
Song Y , Wu H, Lu X, et al. Repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation regulates effective connectivity patterns of brain 
networks in the spectrum of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. 
Front Aging Neurosci. 2024;16:1343926.
 127. Bok J, Ha J, Ahn BJ, Jang Y . Disease-modifying effects of non-
invasive electroceuticals on β-amyloid plaques and tau tangles 
for Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Mol Sci. 2022;24(1):679.
 128. Belousova E, Salikhova D, Maksimov Y , Nebogatikov V ,  
Sudina A, Goldshtein D, Ustyugov A. Proposed mechanisms 
of cell therapy for Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Mol Sci. 
2024;25(22):12378.
 129. Krattli RP Jr, Markarian M, Madan S, Swami D, Quade AM, 
Baulch JE, Blurton-Jones M, Acharya MM. Comparing 
functional consequences of human iPSC-microglia and 
neural stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles in mitigating 
cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease. Aging Cell. 
2026;25(1):Article e70341.
 130. Garcia-Contreras M, Thakor AS. Extracellular vesicles 
in Alzheimer’s disease: From pathology to therapeutic 
approaches. Neural Regen Res. 2023;18(1):18–22.
 131. Syková E, Voříšek I, Starčuk Z, Kratochvíla J, Pavlova I, 
Ichikawa Y , Kwok JCF , Kmoníčková E, Myronchenko S, 
Hromádka T, et al. Disruption of extracellular matrix and 
Perineuronal nets modulates extracellular space volume and 
geometry. J Neurosci. 2025;45(8):Article e0517242024.
 132. Damle EB, Morrison VE, Cioma J, Volic M, Bix GJ. Co-
administration of extracellular matrix-based biomaterials 
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 25]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 25
with neural stem cell transplantation for treatment of central 
nervous system injury. Front Neurosci. 2023;17:1177040.
 133. Wang H, Levey A, Wang G. Lymphatic-venous 
anastomosis surgery for Alzheimer’s disease. Gen Psychiatr. 
2025;38(3):Article e102062.
 134. Ding J, Zhao C, Hao X, Jiao H. Glymphatic and meningeal 
lymphatic dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: Mechanisms 
and therapeutic perspectives. Alzheimers Dement. 
2025;21(10):Article e70709.
 135. Wen YR, Y ang JH, Wang X, Y ao ZB. Induced dural 
lymphangiogenesis facilities soluble amyloid-beta clearance 
from brain in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Neural Regen Res. 2018;13(4):709–716.
 136. Chen J-Y , Zhao D-W , Yin Y , Gui L, Chen X, Wang X-M, 
Wang P-B, Zuo C-H, Lai Z-P , Li C, et al. Deep cervical 
lymphovenous anastomosis (LV A) for Alzheimer’s disease: 
Microsurgical procedure in a prospective cohort study. Int J 
Surg. 2025;111(7):4211–4221.
 137. Chen Q, Wen Q, Zhong T, Liu J, Gao H. Deep cervical 
lymphaticovenous anastomosis for Alzheimer’s disease: A 
narrative review. Alzheimers Dement. 2025;21(12):Article e71038.
 138. Li X, Zhang C, Fang Y , Xin M, Shi J, Zhang Z, Wang Z,  
Ren Z. Promising outcomes 5 weeks after a surgical cervical 
shunting procedure to unclog cerebral lymphatic systems 
in a patient with Alzheimer’s disease. Gen Psychiatr. 
2024;37(3):Article e101641.
 139. Zhang R, Liu YY , Xia X, Li X. Unvalidated efficacy and 
significant risks hinder clinical use of deep cervical 
lymphatic-venous anastomosis for Alzheimer’s disease. Front 
Aging Neurosci. 2025;17:1671741.
 140. Da Mesquita S, Papadopoulos Z, Dykstra T, Brase L,  
Farias FG, Wall M, Jiang H, Kodira CD, de Lima KA,  
Herz J, et al. Meningeal lymphatics affect microglia responses 
and anti-aβ immunotherapy. Nature. 2021;593(7858):255–260.
 141. Da Mesquita S, Louveau A, Vaccari A, Smirnov I,  
Cornelison RC, Kingsmore KM, Contarino C,  
Onengut-Gumuscu S, Farber E, Raper D, et al. Functional 
aspects of meningeal lymphatics in ageing and Alzheimer’s 
disease. Nature. 2018;560(7717):185–191.
 142. Lin W , Zhao XY , Cheng JW , Li LT, Jiang Q, Zhang YX,  
Han F . Signaling pathways in brain ischemia: Mechanisms and 
therapeutic implications. Pharmacol Ther. 2023;251: 
Article 108541.
 143. Majumder D. Ischemic stroke: Pathophysiology and 
evolving treatment approaches. Neurosci Insights. 
2024;19:26331055241292600.
 144. Kim JH, Kim SY , Kim B, Lee SR, Cha SH, Lee DS, Lee HJ. 
Prospects of therapeutic target and directions for ischemic 
stroke. Pharmaceuticals. 2021;14(4):321.
 145. Paul S, Candelario-Jalil E. Emerging neuroprotective strategies 
for the treatment of ischemic stroke: An overview of clinical and 
preclinical studies. Exp Neurol. 2021;335:Article 113518.
 146. Bobo RH, Laske DW , Akbasak A, Morrison PF , Dedrick RL,  
Oldfield EH. Convection-enhanced delivery of macromolecules 
in the brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1994;91(6):2076–2080.
 147. Mehta AM, Sonabend AM, Bruce JN. Convection-enhanced 
delivery. Neurotherapeutics. 2017;14(2):358–371.
 148. Karasin B, Boyce M, Kleban M, Hancock J, Rizzo G,  
Hardinge T, Eskuchen L, Watkinson J, Gold E. 
Encephaloduroarteriosynangiosis procedure: A treatment 
option for patients with Moyamoya disease. AORN J. 
2024;119(3):198–209.
 149. Liu S, Huang Z, Yin Z, Chen L, Y e L, Zhang D, Bai X. Drp1 
in Parkinson’s disease: Mechanisms of disease pathology 
and the promise of targeted therapeutic strategies. Life Sci. 
2026;384:Article 124086.
 150. Zhou M, Zheng M, Liang S, Li M, Ma J, Zhang S, Song X, 
Hu Y , Lyu Y , Ou X, et al. Inherent potential of mitochondria-
targeted interventions for chronic neurodegenerative 
diseases. Neural Regen Res. 2026;21(4):1409–1427.
 151. Macedo VFB, Macedo VKB, de Miranda Coelho JAP ,  
de Melo Barboza AM. Parkinson’s disease physiopathology-
beyond the alpha-synuclein aggregation: A narrative review. 
Front Aging Neurosci. 2025;17:1664269.
 152. Duvey BK, Sumbel RS, Abhishek DS, Bhargava A, Mittal V , 
Sharma A. Dual approaches for Parkinson’s disease: Role of 
the dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic therapies. Curr 
Aging Sci. 2025; 10.2174/0118746098382353251012173313.
 153. Jarraya B, Boulet S, Scott Ralph G, Jan C, Bonvento G, Azzouz M, 
Miskin JE, Shin M, Delzescaux T, Drouot X, et al. Dopamine 
gene therapy for Parkinson’s disease in a nonhuman primate 
without associated dyskinesia. Sci Transl Med. 2009;1(2):2ra4.
 154. Liu Z, Cheung HH. Stem cell-based therapies for Parkinson 
disease. Int J Mol Sci. 2020;21(21):8060.
 155. Martinez-Fernandez R, Rodríguez-Rojas R, Álamo MD, 
Hernández-Fernández F , Pineda-Pardo JA, Dileone M, 
Alonso-Frech F , Foffani G, Obeso I, Gasca-Salas C, et al. 
Focused ultrasound subthalamotomy in patients with 
asymmetric Parkinson’s disease: A pilot study. Lancet Neurol. 
2018;17(1):54–63.
 156. del Olmo MF , Bello O, Cudeiro J. Transcranial magnetic 
stimulation over dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in Parkinson’s 
disease. Clin Neurophysiol. 2007;118(1):131–139.
 157. Limousin P , Foltynie T. Long-term outcomes of deep 
brain stimulation in Parkinson disease. Nat Rev Neurol. 
2019;15(4):234–242.
 158. Reum T, Olshausen F , Mazel T, Vorísek I, Morgenstern R,  
Syková E. Diffusion parameters in the striatum of rats 
with 6-hydroxydopamine-induced lesions and with fetal 
mesencephalic grafts. J Neurosci Res. 2002;70(5):680–693.
 159. Soria FN, Paviolo C, Doudnikoff E, Arotcarena ML, Lee A,  
Danné N, Mandal AK, Gosset P , Dehay B, Groc L, et al. 
Synucleinopathy alters nanoscale organization and diffusion 
in the brain extracellular space through hyaluronan 
remodeling. Nat Commun. 2020;11(1):3440.
 160. Zou W , Pu T, Feng W , Lu M, Zheng Y , du R, Xiao M,  
Hu G. Blocking meningeal lymphatic drainage aggravates 
Parkinson’s disease-like pathology in mice overexpressing 
mutated α-synuclein. Transl Neurodegener. 2019;8:7.
 161. Ren R, Shi C, Cao J, Sun Y , Zhao X, Guo Y , Wang C, 
Lei H, Jiang H, Ablat N, et al. Neuroprotective effects 
of a standardized flavonoid extract of safflower against 
neurotoxin-induced cellular and animal models of 
Parkinson’s disease. Sci Rep. 2016;6:22135.
 162. Fang Y , Dong Y , Zheng T, du D, Wen J, Gao D, Liu L. Altered 
tracer distribution and clearance in the extracellular space of 
the substantia nigra in a rodent model of Parkinson’s disease. 
Front Neurosci. 2017;11:409.
 163. Lv D, Li J, Li H, Fu Y , Wang W . Imaging and quantitative 
analysis of the interstitial space in the caudate nucleus in 
a rotenone-induced rat model of Parkinson’s disease using 
tracer-based MRI. Aging Dis. 2017;8(1):1–6.
 164. Du D, Fu W , Su S, Mao X, Y ang L, Xu M, Yuan Y , Gao Y ,  
Geng Z, Chen Y , et al. Remote regulation of molecular 
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 26]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 26
diffusion in extracellular space of Parkinson’s disease rat 
model by subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation. Cyborg 
Bionic Syst. 2025;6:0218.
 165. Ostrom QT, Patil N, Cioffi G, Waite K, Kruchko C,  
Barnholtz-Sloan JS. CBTRUS statistical report: Primary brain 
and other central nervous system tumors diagnosed in the 
United States in 2013-2017. Neuro-Oncology. 2020;22(12 
Suppl 2):iv1–iv96.
 166. Louis DN, Perry A, Reifenberger G, von Deimling A, 
Figarella-Branger D, Cavenee WK, Ohgaki H, Wiestler OD, 
Kleihues P , Ellison DW . The 2016 World Health Organization 
classification of tumors of the central nervous system: A 
summary. Acta Neuropathol. 2016;131(6):803–820.
 167. Vargová L, Homola A, Zámecník J, Tichý M, Benes V ,  
Syková E. Diffusion parameters of the extracellular space in 
human gliomas. Glia. 2003;42(1):77–88.
 168. Zámecník J, Vargová L, Homola A, Kodet R, Syková E. 
Extracellular matrix glycoproteins and diffusion barriers 
in human astrocytic tumours. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 
2004;30(4):338–350.
 169. Zhou Z, Singh R, Souweidane MM. Convection-enhanced 
delivery for diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma treatment. Curr 
Neuropharmacol. 2017;15(1):116–128.
 170. Lonser RR, Walbridge S, Garmestani K, Butman JA,  
Walters HA, Vortmeyer AO, Morrison PF , Brechbiel MW ,  
Oldfield EH. Successful and safe perfusion of the primate 
brainstem: In vivo magnetic resonance imaging of 
macromolecular distribution during infusion. J Neurosurg. 
2002;97(4):905–913.
 171. Thompson AJ, Baranzini SE, Geurts J, Hemmer B, Ciccarelli O. 
Multiple sclerosis. Lancet. 2018;391(10130):1622–1636.
 172. Marder SR, Cannon TD. Schizophrenia. N Engl J Med. 
2019;381(18):1753–1761.
 173. McCutcheon RA, Krystal JH, Howes OD. Dopamine 
and glutamate in schizophrenia: Biology, symptoms and 
treatment. World Psychiatry. 2020;19(1):15–33.
 174. Howes OD, Shatalina E. Integrating the neurodevelopmental 
and dopamine hypotheses of schizophrenia and the role 
of cortical excitation-inhibition balance. Biol Psychiatry. 
2022;92(6):501–513.
 175. Howes OD, Onwordi EC. The synaptic hypothesis of 
schizophrenia version III: A master mechanism. Mol 
Psychiatry. 2023;28(5):1843–1856.
 176. Muller N. Inflammation in schizophrenia: Pathogenetic 
aspects and therapeutic considerations. Schizophr Bull. 
2018;44(5):973–982.
 177. Wu YF , Sytwu HK, Lung FW . Polymorphisms in the human 
aquaporin 4 gene are associated with schizophrenia in the 
Southern Chinese Han population: A case-control study. 
Front Psych. 2020;11:596.
 178. Li Z, Li X, Jin M, Liu Y , He Y , Jia N, Cui X, Liu Y , Hu G, 
Yu Q. Identification of potential biomarkers and their 
correlation with immune infiltration cells in schizophrenia 
using combinative bioinformatics strategy. Psychiatry Res. 
2022;314:Article 114658.
 179. Brunner G, Gajwani R, Gross J, Gumley A, Timmerman RH,  
Taylor R, Krishnadas R, Lawrie SM, Schwannauer M, 
Schultze-Lutter F , et al. Choroid plexus morphology in 
schizophrenia and early-stage psychosis: A cross-sectional 
study. Schizophr Res. 2025;275:107–114.
 180. Zhou YF , Huang JC, Zhang P , Fan FM, Chen S, Fan HZ, 
Cui YM, Luo XG, Tan SP , Wang ZR, et al. Choroid plexus 
enlargement and allostatic load in schizophrenia. Schizophr 
Bull. 2020;46(3):722–731.
 181. Y akimov V , Moussiopoulou J, Roell L, Kallweit MS, 
Boudriot E, Mortazavi M, Papiol S, Krčmář L, Campana M, 
Schulte EC, et al. Investigation of choroid plexus variability 
in schizophrenia-spectrum disorders-insights from a 
multimodal study. Schizophrenia. 2024;10(1):121.
 182. Tu Y , Fang Y , Li G, Xiong F , Gao F . Glymphatic system 
dysfunction underlying schizophrenia is associated with 
cognitive impairment. Schizophr Bull. 2024;50(5):1223–1231.
 183. Abdolizadeh A, Torres-Carmona E, Kambari Y , Amaev A,  
Song J, Ueno F , Koizumi T, Nakajima S, Agarwal SM,  
de Luca V , et al. Evaluation of the glymphatic system in 
schizophrenia spectrum disorder using proton magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy measurement of brain macromolecule 
and diffusion tensor image analysis along the perivascular space 
index. Schizophr Bull. 2024;50(6):1396–1410.
 184. Barlattani T, de Luca D, Giambartolomei S, Bologna A, 
Innocenzi A, Bruno F , Socci V , Malavolta M, Rossi A, 
de Berardis D, et al. Glymphatic system dysfunction in 
young adults hospitalized for an acute psychotic episode: 
A preliminary report from a pilot study. Front Psych. 
2025;16:1653144.
 185. Korann V , Panganiban KJ, Stogios N, Remington G, 
Graff-Guerrero A, Chintoh A, Hahn MK, Agarwal SM. 
The dysregulation of the glymphatic system in patients 
with psychosis spectrum disorders minimally exposed to 
antipsychotics: La deregulation du systeme glymphatique en 
presence de troubles psychotiques chez des patients peu exposes 
a des antipsychotiques. Can J Psychiatr. 2025;70(3):260–270.
 186. Hua L, Zeng X, Zhang K, Zhao Z, Yuan Z. Reduced 
glymphatic clearance in early psychosis. Mol Psychiatry. 
2025;30(10):4665–4676.
 187. Diniz E, Fonseca L, Rocha D, Trevizol A, Cerqueira R,  
Ortiz B, Brunoni AR, Bressan R, Correll CU, Gadelha A. 
Treatment resistance in schizophrenia: A meta-analysis of 
prevalence and correlates. Braz J Psychiatry. 2023;45(5): 
448–458.
 188. Li JW , Gy F , Lv JJ, Chen RJ, Wang LJ, Zeng XX, Yuan J, Hu XL, 
Zhao HM, Lu X. A rhythmic encoding approach based on 
EEG time-frequency image for epileptic seizure detection. 
Biomed Signal Process Contr. 2025;99:Article 106824.
 189. Vera-González A. Pathophysiological mechanisms underlying 
the etiologies of seizures and epilepsy. In: Czuczwar SJ, editor. 
Epilepsy. Brisbane (Australia): Exon Publications; 2022. p. 1–13. 
 190. Cavarsan CF , Malheiros J, Hamani C, Najm I, Covolan L. 
Is mossy fiber sprouting a potential therapeutic target for 
epilepsy? Front Neurol. 2018;9:1023.
 191. Burns SP , Santaniello S, Y affe RB, Jouny CC, Crone NE, 
Bergey GK, Anderson WS, Sarma SV . Network dynamics of 
the brain and influence of the epileptic seizure onset zone. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014;111(49):E5321–E5330.
 192. Fröhlich F , Bazhenov M, Iragui-Madoz V , Sejnowski TJ. 
Potassium dynamics in the epileptic cortex: New insights on 
an old topic. Neuroscientist. 2008;14(5):422–433.
 193. Scheffer IE, Berkovic S, Capovilla G, Connolly MB,  
French J, Guilhoto L, Hirsch E, Jain S, Mathern GW ,  
Moshé SL, et al. ILAE classification of the epilepsies: Position 
paper of the ILAE Commission for Classification and 
Terminology. Epilepsia. 2017;58(4):512–521.
 194. Slais K, Vorisek I, Zoremba N, Homola A, Dmytrenko L, 
Sykova E. Brain metabolism and diffusion in the rat cerebral 
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 27]
Han et al. 2026 | https://doi.org/10.34133/cbsystems.0529 27
cortex during pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus. Exp 
Neurol. 2008;209(1):145–154.
 195. Hrabetova S, Nicholson C. Contribution of dead-space 
microdomains to tortuosity of brain extracellular space. 
Neurochem Int. 2004;45(4):467–477.
 196. Binder DK, Nagelhus EA, Ottersen OP . Aquaporin-4 and 
epilepsy. Glia. 2012;60(8):1203–1214.
 197. Parsons ALM, Bucknor EMV , Castroflorio E, Soares TR,  
Oliver PL, Rial D. The interconnected mechanisms of 
oxidative stress and neuroinflammation in epilepsy. 
Antioxidants. 2022;11(1):157.
 198. Vezzani A, Friedman A, Dingledine RJ. The role of inflammation 
in epileptogenesis. Neuropharmacology. 2013;69:16–24.
 199. González OC, Timofeev I, Bazhenov M. Role of ion 
concentration dynamics in epileptic seizures. In: Noebels JL,  
Avoli M, Rogawski MA, Vezzani A, Delgado-Escueta AV , 
editors. Jasper’s basic mechanisms of the epilepsies. New Y ork: 
Oxford University Press; 2024. p. 351–364. 
 200. Hersh DS, Nguyen BA, Dancy JG, Adapa AR, Winkles JA,  
Woodworth GF , Kim AJ, Frenkel V . Pulsed ultrasound 
expands the extracellular and perivascular spaces of the brain. 
Brain Res. 2016;1646:543–550.
 201. Rogawski MA. Convection-enhanced delivery in the 
treatment of epilepsy. Neurotherapeutics. 2009;6(2):344–351.
 202. Loscher W , Potschka H. Drug resistance in brain diseases 
and the role of drug efflux transporters. Nat Rev Neurosci. 
2005;6(8):591–602.
 203. Haglund MM, Hochman DW . Furosemide and mannitol 
suppression of epileptic activity in the human brain. J 
Neurophysiol. 2005;94(2):907–918.
 204. Ahmad S, Clarke L, Hewett AJ, Richens A. Controlled trial of 
frusemide as an antiepileptic drug in focal epilepsy. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol. 1976;3(4):621–625.
 205. Gharaylou Z, Tafakhori A, Agah E, Aghamollaii V ,  
Kebriaeezadeh A, Hadjighassem M. A preliminary study 
evaluating the safety and efficacy of bumetanide, an NKCC1 
inhibitor, patients with drug-resistant epilepsy. CNS Drugs. 
2019;33(3):283–291.
 206. Wang HE, Triebkorn P , Breyton M, Dollomaja B,  
Lemarechal JD, Petkoski S, Sorrentino P , Depannemaecker D,  
Hashemi M, Jirsa VK. Virtual brain twins: From basic 
neuroscience to clinical use. Natl Sci Rev. 2024;11(5):nwae079.
 207. Markram H, Muller E, Ramaswamy S, Reimann MW , 
Abdellah M, Sanchez CA, Ailamaki A, Alonso-Nanclares L, 
Antille N, Arsever S, et al. Reconstruction and simulation of 
neocortical microcircuitry. Cell. 2015;163(2):456–492.
 208. MICrONS Consortium. Functional connectomics 
spanning multiple areas of mouse visual cortex. Nature. 
2025;640(8058):435–447.
 209. Tønnesen J, Inavalli V , Nägerl UV . Super-resolution imaging 
of the extracellular space in living brain tissue. Cell. 
2018;172(5):1108–1121.e15.
 210. Lehmenkuhler A, Sykova E, Svoboda J, Zilles K,  
Nicholson C. Extracellular-space parameters in the rat 
neocortex and subcortical white-matter during postnatal-
development determined by diffusion analysis. Neuroscience. 
1993;55(2):339–351.
 211. Mazel T, Richter F , Vargová L, Syková E. Changes in 
extracellular space volume and geometry induced by cortical 
spreading depression in immature and adult rats. Physiol Res. 
2002;51:S85–S93.
 212. Syková E, Mazel T, Simonová Z. Diffusion constraints 
and neuron-glia interaction during aging. Exp Gerontol. 
1998;33(7–8):837–851.
 213. Y ang SF , Wang Y , Li K, Tang X, Zhang K, Shi C, Han H,  
Peng Y . Extracellular space diffusion analysis in the infant 
and adult rat striatum using magnetic resonance imaging. Int 
J Dev Neurosci. 2016;53:1–7.
 214. Kilb W , Dierkes PW , Sykova E, Vargova L, Luhmann HJ. 
Hypoosmolar conditions reduce extracellular volume fraction 
and enhance epileptiform activity in the CA3 region of the 
immature rat hippocampus. J Neurosci Res. 2006;84(1):119–129.
 215. Jansson A, Mazel T, Andbjer B, Rosen L, Guidolin D, Zoli M, 
Sykova E, Agnati LF , Fuxe K. Effects of nitric oxide inhibition 
on the spread of biotinylated dextran and on extracellular 
space parameters in the neostriatum of the male rat. 
Neuroscience. 1999;91(1):69–80.
 216. Syková E, Mazel T, Hasenohrl RU, Harvey AR, Simonova Z, 
Mulders WH, Huston JP . Learning deficits in aged rats related to 
decrease in extracellular volume and loss of diffusion anisotropy 
in hippocampus. Hippocampus. 2002;12(2):269–279.
 217. Benveniste H, Lee H, Ding F , Sun Q, Al-Bizri E, Makaryus R,  
Probst S, Nedergaard M, Stein EA, Lu H. Anesthesia with 
dexmedetomidine and low-dose isoflurane increases solute 
transport via the glymphatic pathway in rat brain when compared 
with high-dose isoflurane. Anesthesiology. 2017;127(6):976–988.
 218. Casley-Smith JR, Földi-Börsök E, Földi M. The prelymphatic 
pathways of the brain as revealed by cervical lymphatic 
obstruction and the passage of particles. Br J Exp Pathol. 
1976;57(2):179–188.
 219. Oxana S-G, Alexander S, Inna B, Ivan F , Andrey T,  
Alexander D, Maria T, Daria E, Viktoria A, Arina E, et al. 
Mechanisms of phototherapy of Alzheimer’s disease during 
sleep and wakefulness: The role of the meningeal lymphatics. 
Front Optoelectron. 2023;16(1):22.
 220. Cai Y , Wan QQ, Cai XJ, Gao YJ, Han HB. Epidural 
photobiomodulation accelerates the drainage of brain 
interstitial fluid and its mechanism. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 
2022;54(5):1000–1005.
 221. Murdock MH, Y ang C-Y , Sun N, Pao P-C, Blanco-Duque C,  
Kahn MC, Kim TH, Lavoie NS, Victor MB, Islam MR, et al.  
Multisensory gamma stimulation promotes glymphatic 
clearance of amyloid. Nature. 2024;627(8002):149–156.
 222. Venturino A, Schulz R, De Jesús-Cortés H, Maes ME,  
Nagy B, Reilly-Andújar F , Colombo G, Cubero RJA, 
Uiterkamp FES, Bear MF , et al. Microglia enable mature 
perineuronal nets disassembly upon anesthetic ketamine 
exposure or 60-Hz light entrainment in the healthy brain. Cell 
Rep. 2021;36(1):Article 109313.
 223. Dreha-Kulaczewski S, Joseph AA, Merboldt KD,  
Ludwig HC, Gärtner J, Frahm J. Inspiration is the major 
regulator of human CSF flow. J Neurosci. 2015;35(6):2485–2491.
 224. Wu C, Lin T, Ding Q, Zhang N, Ou ZT, Cai GY ,  
Chen HY , Xu JY , Li G, Pei Z, et al. Continuous theta-burst 
stimulation promotes paravascular CSF-interstitial  
fluid exchange through regulation of aquaporin-4 
polarization in APP/PS1 mice. Mediat Inflamm. 
2022;2022:2140524.
 225. Wu C, Zhang Q, Feng YW , Zhang N, Liu Q, Ou ZT, Lin T, 
Ding Q, Li G, Pei Z, et al. GABA promotes interstitial fluid 
clearance in an AQP4-dependent manner by activating the 
GABAA R. J Neurochem. 2023;166(3):560–571.
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026



[page 28]
Brain Extracellular Space: From an Overlooked Dimension to Catalyst of a Novel
Neuroscience Paradigm
Hongbin Han, Hui Dai, Leonor Serrano Lopes, Ruiqing Ni, Benjamin F. Combes, Yangjing Song, Hanbo Tan, Meng Xu, Hongfeng Li,
Shuhong Lv, Zhaohe Yang, Tianzi Gao, Mengyu Zhang, Yang Shi, Jingjing Shao, Yanni Zhang, and Wanyi Fu
Citation: Han H, Dai H, Lopes L, Ni R, Combes B, Song Y, Tan H, Xu M, Li H, Lv S, et al. Brain Extracellular Space: From
an Overlooked Dimension to Catalyst of a Novel Neuroscience Paradigm. Cyborg Bionic Syst. 2026;7:0529.  DOI: 10.34133/
cbsystems.0529
Despite huge investment, therapies for brain disorders remain largely ineffective in clinical practice. Accumulating
evidence indicates that this low translational success is closely linked to the long-standing overlook of the brain
extracellular space (ECS) in preclinical research, clinical practice, and regulatory frameworks. After over 4 decades of
scientific exploration, particularly with recent breakthroughs in imaging and quantitative measurement methods, it is
timely to integrate the ECS into the current neuroscience framework. This paper investigates underlying determinants
of low translational success of central nervous system drugs and therapeutic devices, reviews the historical and
technical bottlenecks that lead to the neglect of ECS research, and emphasizes its transformative potential in reshaping
therapeutic strategies. We propose incorporating the ECS into neuroscience research, clinical regulatory assessment,
and medical education, thereby establishing a comprehensive paradigm that omits no physical space for precision
therapeutics targeting brain disorders.
Image
View the article online
https://spj.science.org/doi/10.34133/cbsystems.0529
Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Cyborg and Bionic Systems (ISSN 2692-7632) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York
Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 
Copyright © 2026 Hongbin Han et al.
Exclusive licensee Beijing Institute of Technology Press. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0).
Downloaded from https://spj.science.org at Peking University on March 04, 2026
